Trusted Research Environment Data Access Agreement Template



Scope:

This Agreement is intended for use where data is accessed within a Trusted Research Environment
(TRE) for the purposes of research and development for the public good.

Between:

     (1) [Host Organisation name] whose registered address is [address] (the Host Organisation) and
     (2) [User Organisation name] whose registered address is [address] (the User Organisation)
         (each ‘Party’ and together ‘Parties’)



Where data access will occur within the following TRE: [name] (the TRE)

The Host Organisation authorises access to Data in the TRE for Approved Researcher(s) from the
User Organisation who have accepted the Terms of Use [Annex 1].  Access is authorised for the
purposes of the Approved Project(s) [Annex 2] or Approved Purposes defined in Annex  only:



 Project Details
 Approved Project(s)                    [name/details of Approved Project(s)] as further defined in Annex
                                        2 or Approved Purposes defined in Annex 3
 Research Project Sponsor               [name of Sponsor (if applicable)]
 Lead Researcher/Principal              [name]
 Investigator/ Main
 Applicant]
 User Organisation                      [name]
 Term                                   [authorised duration of Approved Project(s)/Purposes]
 Data                                   [description of datasets requested for Approved
                                        Project(s)/Purposes] as further defined in Annex 4



Responsibility:

The User Organisation is responsible for compliance by Approved Researchers with the terms of
this Agreement and the Terms of Use [Annex 1] as further specified below.

Approved Researchers are not required to sign this Agreement but must accept the Terms of Use
before accessing the TRE.


The terms below (including those set out in the Annexes) govern the access to the Data:






                                                                                                            Page 1 of 11



1.   Safe People            1.
                                  1.1.  The User Organisation shall:
                                       1.1.1. make Approved Researcher(s) aware of, and ensure Approved
                                              Researcher(s) comply with, the terms of this Agreement and
                                              the Terms of Use, and any breach by an Approved Researcher
                                              of the Terms of Use or this Agreement shall be a breach of the
                                              User Organisation of this Agreement;
                                       1.1.2. notify the Host Organisation within 5 working days of changes
                                              to Approved Researcher(s), including where an Approved
                                              Researcher has left the User Organisation or is no longer
                                              authorised to work on the Approved Project(s); and
                                       1.1.3. ensure that Approved Researchers do not share login details
                                              or access credentials to the TRE with any other person and do
                                              not attempt to access the Data or the TRE after they have
                                              been notified that they are no longer authorised to do so.
                                  1.2.  The User Organisation warrants that the Approved Researcher(s)
                                        are appropriately trained and skilled in data protection,
                                        confidentiality, governance, and security, and to the standard
                                        specified in Annex
                                  1.3.  The Host Organisation shall:
                                       1.3.1. terminate access to the Data on termination or expiry of the
                                              Agreement;
                                       1.3.2. following notification in accordance with clause 1.1.2 above,
                                              terminate access to the TRE for the relevant Approved
                                              Researchers; and
                                       1.3.3. in the event of a breach or suspected breach of this
                                              Agreement, including the Terms of Use, immediately suspend
                                              access to the Data for one or more Approved Researcher(s)
                                              and fully investigate the breach or suspected breach and may
                                              apply further penalties and/or require remediations as set out
                                              in Annex 6.
                                  1.4.  If there is any conflict between the Terms of Use and this
                                        Agreement, this Agreement shall prevail.







 2.   Safe Projects          2.
                                  2.1.  The User Organisation shall access and use the Data in the TRE:
                                       2.1.1. in accordance with Applicable Laws;
                                       2.1.2. for the Approved Project(s) only, in line with the approved
                                              project scope for research in the public good [as defined in
                                              Annex 2], or where access is permitted under this Agreement
                                              for other Approved Purposes [Annex 3], and not for any other
                                              purposes ; and
                                       2.1.3. in accordance with all applicable ethical standards and
                                              approvals.



                                                                                                              Page 2 of 11



2.2.  The Host Organisation shall publish accurate and up to date details
                                         of the Approved Project(s) and associated Approved Researcher(s)
                                         in a publicly available data use register.
                                   2.3.  The Approved Project(s) may only be varied by following the
                                         procedure set out in Annex 7.

 3.   Safe Settings           3.
                                   3.1.  The Host Organisation shall ensure that the TRE and processing
                                         arrangements implement appropriate technical and organisational
                                         measures in compliance with Data Protection Laws.
                                   3.2.  The User Organisation shall ensure that the Approved
                                         Researchers:
                                        3.2.1. keep the Data and any access credentials to the Data
                                               confidential in accordance with Applicable Laws and with at
                                               least the same degree of care used to protect its own
                                               confidential information;
                                        3.2.2. do not access, use, or disclose the Data other than as
                                               permitted by this Agreement or as required by Applicable
                                               Laws; and
                                        3.2.3. do not introduce or permit the introduction of any virus,
                                               software, code, file or programme into the TRE which could
                                               compromise its security, or the security of the Data, and shall
                                               ensure that the End User security requirements set out in
                                               Annex 8 are followed by the Approved Researcher(s).
                                   3.3.  The Host Organisation shall monitor and audit the use of the TRE
                                         and the Data by the User Organisation and its Approved
                                         Researcher(s) to ensure compliance with the terms of this
                                         Agreement in accordance with the protocol set out in Annex 9.

 4.   Safe Data               4.
                                   4.1.  The User Organisation shall ensure that the Approved Researchers
                                         do not, and do not attempt to:
                                        4.1.1. identify individuals from the Data:
                                        4.1.2. contact any Research Participant; or
                                        4.1.3. link or combine the Data with other information or data
                                               (including any information relating to an identified or
                                               identifiable natural person) available to the User Organisation
                                               without permission from the Host Organisation.
                                   4.2.  The User Organisation acknowledges and agrees that it has sole
                                         responsibility, and the Host Organisation takes no responsibility,
                                         for interpretation or further analysis of the Data.
                                   4.3.  The User Organisation will inform the Host Organisation without
                                         delay, and in any event within 12 hours of becoming aware of:
                                        4.3.1. any unauthorised access, disclosure, loss damage or
                                               alteration of the Data;
                                        4.3.2. any element within the Data that might permit the
                                               identification of a Research Participant;
                                        4.3.3. any event which may impact the confidentiality, integrity or
                                               availability of the Data including cyber security incidents;



                                                                                                               Page 3 of 11



4.3.4. any complaints in relation to the Data including complaints
                                               from an individual or supervisory authority; and
                                        4.3.5. any request from a Research Participant to exercise their
                                               rights in respect of the Data.
                                   4.4.  To the extent required by Data Protection Laws, the Host
                                         Organisation shall notify data protection supervisory authorities
                                         and – where applicable – notify affected data subjects in the event
                                         of a personal data breach (provided that the User Organisation
                                         shall not be restricted from making such notifications in cases
                                         where such notifications are required by Data Protection
                                         Legislation and the Host Organisation fails to make such
                                         notifications in accordance with the requirements of Data
                                         Protection Legislation). The parties will collaborate in this regard
                                         as appropriate.
                                   4.5.  Host Organisation shall be responsible for responding to data
                                         subject rights requests submitted to either party in an appropriate
                                         and legal manner.  User Organisation shall provide reasonable
                                         assistance to Host Organisation where this is necessary in order to
                                         respond.
                                   4.6.  Where the Approved Project(s) involve access to linked NHS data,
                                         the provisions in Annex 16 shall apply.

 5.   Safe Outputs            5.
                                   5.1.  The User Organisation may only publish, distribute or otherwise
                                         share Research Outputs that have been approved in accordance
                                         with the process set out at Annex 10 and the Output
                                         acknowledgment policy set out in Annex 11. Research Outputs
                                         must not include Personal Data.
                                   5.2.  The User Organisation shall not:
                                        5.2.1. use any Research Output for any purpose contrary to
                                               Applicable Laws or Approved Project(s) purposes; or
                                        5.2.2. download, extract, transmit, transfer, remove, share, copy, or
                                               publish any of the Data from the TRE (but this shall not
                                               prevent the publication of Research Outputs in accordance
                                               with Annex 11).

 6.   Intellectual            6.
      Property                     6.1.  This Agreement is not intended to constitute any transfer of
                                         Intellectual Property Rights in the Data or the TRE.
                                   6.2.  Ownership of Intellectual Property Rights is set out in Annex 13.
                                   6.3.  Unless otherwise specified in Annex 13, Intellectual Property
                                         Rights in the Research Outputs shall belong to the User
                                         Organisation.











                                                                                                                Page 4 of 11



7.   Research                7.
      uncertainty/ no              7.1.   It is generally not possible to know with certainty at the outset of
      warranty                            research whether access to and use of particular datasets will
                                          answer the relevant research question or produce valuable
                                          outputs, therefore to the fullest extent permitted under Applicable
                                          Laws, the Host Organisation:
                                         7.1.1. makes no warranty, express or implied as to the quality of the
                                                Data or its suitability for the Approved Project(s); and
                                         7.1.2. excludes all liability for actions, claims, proceedings,
                                                demands, losses, costs, awards, damages, and payments
                                                suffered or made by the User Organisation that may arise
                                                from their use of the Data or unavailability of the Data for
                                                whatever reason.
 8.   Compliance              8.
      with Laws                    8.1.   Each Party shall comply with their respective obligations under all
                                          Applicable Laws, including Data Protection Laws.
                                   8.2.   If the User Organisation is outside the UK and not in a country in
                                          respect of which an adequacy decision under Art.45 UK GDPR
                                          applies1, the terms at Annex 17 will apply.
                                   8.3.   If either Party is obliged to respond to requests under the
                                          Freedom of Information Act 2000 (‘FOIA’2 ), and a request is
                                          received regarding the Data, the other Party shall provide
                                          reasonable assistance to the Party in receipt of the request to
                                          comply with its obligations under FOIA. The Party subject to any
                                          request under FOIA retains overall discretion for responding to
                                          requests made under FOIA.
 9.   Cost Recovery           9.   The Host Organisation may charge fees for providing the User
      and Service                  Organisation with access to the TRE in accordance with the Cost
      Levels                       Recovery Policy set out in Annex 14.
                              10. Applicable service levels and helpdesk support facilities provided by the
                                   Host Organisation are set out in Annex 18
 10.  Further                 11.
      provisions                   11.1.           This Agreement is drafted in the English language. If this
                                          Agreement is translated into any other language, the English
                                          language version shall prevail. All other documents provided under
                                          or in connection with this Agreement shall be in English or
                                          accompanied by a certified English translation.
                                   11.2.           This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between
                                          the Parties. No variation of this Agreement shall be effective
                                          unless it is agreed in writing and signed by the Parties or their
                                          authorised representatives.
                                   11.3.           Any notices under this Agreement shall be in writing sent
                                          to the Parties registered address or by email: for Host
                                          Organisation: [insert email address]; and for the User Organisation
                                          [insert email address].


1 Note: these are: countries in the EEA, as well as Andorra, Argentina, Canada (commercial organisations),
Gibraltar, Guernsey, Isle of Man, Israel, Japan (private sector), Jersey, New Zealand, Republic of South Korea,
Switzerland and Uruguay.
2  Drafting note: if the governing law in clause 9 below is Scottish law, please update this reference to include
“Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 (‘FOISA’)” and update the rest of this clause accordingly.

                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 11



11.4.          No person other than a Party to this Agreement shall have
                                        any rights to enforce any term of this Agreement.
                                  11.5.          Either Party may terminate this agreement by thirty (30)
                                        days’ written notice to the other Party.
                                  11.6.          The Term of this Agreement is set out in Annex 7 and may
                                        be extended by following the procedure set out in Annex 7.
                                  11.7.          This Agreement, its subject matter, or its formation
                                        (including non-contractual disputes or claims) shall be governed
                                        and construed in accordance with the laws of England and Wales
                                        and the Parties agree to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English
                                        Courts (including non-contractual disputes or claims).


 Signatories:


 Signed by an
 authorised
 representative for
 and on behalf of
 the User
 Organisation:


 Signed by an
 authorised
 representative for
 and on behalf of
 Host Organisation:




The following definitions apply in the Agreement:

“Agreement” means this Trusted Research Environment (TRE) Data Access Agreement including the
Annexes hereto and the Terms of Use.
“Applicable Laws” means all applicable laws, statutes, regulations, and codes from time to time in
force including Data Protection Laws.
“Approved Project(s)” means the project(s) identified in Annex 2 below.
“Approved Purposes” means the purposes identified in Annex 3 below.
“Approved Researcher(s)” means Researcher(s) whose access to and use of the Data in the TRE for
the Approved Project(s) or Approved Purposes has been approved in writing by the Host
Organisation to the User Organisation, and who have entered the Terms of Use, prior to such access
or use, and such approval has not been revoked by the Host Organisation.
“Data” means the data fields and datasets to which the User Organisation has been approved access
as described above.
“Data Protection Laws” means any Applicable Laws with respect to data protection and
privacy, including the General Data Protection Regulation ((EU) 2016/679) (“GDPR”), the UK
GDPR (as defined in the UK Data Protection Act 2018) and/or Data Protection Act 2018, as
applicable to either Party and or the activities under this Agreement.


                                                                                                             Page 6 of 11



“Host Organisation” means the organisation which is accredited to host and control the TRE.
“Intellectual Property Rights” means the patents, rights to inventions, copyright and related rights,
moral rights, trademarks and service marks, business names and domain names, rights in get-up,
goodwill and the right to sue for passing off, rights in designs, rights in computer software, database
rights, rights to use, and protect the confidentiality of, confidential information (including know-how
and trade secrets) and all other intellectual property rights, in each case whether registered or
unregistered and including all applications and rights to apply for and be granted, renewals or
extensions of, and rights to claim priority from, such rights and all similar or equivalent rights or
forms of protection which subsist or will subsist now or in the future in any part of the world.
“Personal Data” has the meaning given to it in Data Protection Laws.
“Principal Investigator” means the individual specified above.
“Research Output” means any data, learning, discovery, insight, paper, publication, or other results
arising out of an Approved Project.
“Research Participant” means an individual whose data forms part of the Data.
“Term” means the duration of the Agreement as provided above.
“Terms of Use” means the Terms of Use of the TRE which will be accepted individually by Approved
Researchers as users of the TRE.
“User Organisation” means the organisation which is responsible for individuals using a TRE service.
“Working Day” means any day other than a Saturday, Sunday, or public holiday in the UK country in
which the Host Organisation is based.



                                                         Annexes
The Annexes are customisable to the individual requirements for the TRE. Host Organisations shall
follow  the  guidance  for  each  Annex  when  deciding  on  what  information  to  include.    Duplication
between the terms above and the Annexes should be avoided and where there is conflict with any
terms in the annexes and the main Agreement, the terms of the main Agreement shall prevail.


Annex 1
Terms of Use

Guidance: Annex 1 contains Terms of Use that may be used for approved researcher access to a TRE.
It is recommended that the Terms of Use present as ‘click through’ terms that the Approved
Researchers accept when accessing the TRE. If there are Terms of Use already in place for the TRE,
insert them here and the below terms will not apply.

Terms of Use:

The Approved Researcher agrees that they must:
     1.   Complete the Office for National Statistics (ONS) Safe Researcher Training prior to accessing
          the TRE/SDE (or equivalent as defined in Annex 5 of the Data Access Agreement)
     2.   Adhere to all relevant data protection legislation, including the UK General Data Protection
          Regulation (GDPR) and the UK Data Protection Act (2018).
     3.   Always preserve the confidentiality of the Data.
     4.   Use the data for research for public good and only within the Approved Project scope and
          purposes (as defined in Annex 2 of the Data Access Agreement).
     5.   Notify the Host Organisation immediately of any breach of data in the TRE or incident that
          may have compromised the security of the Data.
     6.   Ensure that they are not overlooked by unauthorised persons when accessing the TRE.


                                                                                                               Page 7 of 11



The Approved Researcher agrees that they must not:
     7.   Share access credentials or give access to Data in the TRE to any other person.
     8.   Leave their device unattended while accessing the TRE.
     9.   Link data to any other dataset other than those defined in the Approved Project.
     10. Attempt to copy or remove Data or analyses of the Data from the TRE without following the
          TRE Output Checking Policy as defined in Annex 10 of the Data Access Agreement.
     11. Attempt to identify or contact any individual using Data in the TRE.


          I agree that I have fully read and understood the Data Access Agreement and the Terms of
          Use above: [Approved Researcher enters their name and User Organisation name as
          acknowledgement]


Annex 2
Approved Project(s) Description
          Guidance: Annex 2 can cover a single project or multiple projects.  Annex 2 can include the
          following:
                   A detailed summary of the project objectives and statistical analysis plan
                   Attach the approved application form(s)
                   Reference to separate approval system where the Approved Project(s) scope is
                    clearly set out.


Annex 3
Other approved purposes for TRE access

          Guidance: Access to the data may be permitted for a purpose other than a research study
such as access for testing, audit, or feasibility counts.  Where applicable, Annex 3 should set out
terms related to access for such purposes.


Annex 4
Datasets/Data fields available
          Guidance: The purpose of this section is to detail the datasets available for analysis and (if
          applicable) linkage in the TRE.

Annex 5
Approved Researcher training requirements
          Guidance: Details of the training or accreditation requirements prior to requesting Approved
          Researcher status to access data in the TRE as part of an Approved Project. For example, this
          section could state that Researchers should undertake the Office for National Statistics
          (ONS) Safe Researcher Training (SRT) and achieve full accreditation status, or provisional
          accreditation where access to the TRE will be under supervision of an Approved Researcher
          with full accreditation status. Where a TRE will not use the ONS SRT accreditation, an
          equivalent standard of training must be demonstrated, and will be detailed here:





                                                                                                              Page 8 of 11



Annex 6
Non-compliance, Offences and Penalties
          Guidance: Penalties and remediation required for breaches of this Agreement, including self-
          reported breaches, as defined by the Host Organisation should be described here:


Annex 7
Term and Conditions of extension/amendment submission
          Guidance: Set out:
                   The agreed Term for data access, and whether this is for the duration of the project
                    or a defined period (for example, 12 months).
                   The process for submitting a request for an extension to the Term of the Approved
                    Project(s)
                   The process for submitting amendments to the scope or purposes (whether
                    commercial or non-commercial) of the Approved Project(s).




Annex 8
End user security requirements
          Guidance: The User Organisation is responsible for ensuring that electronic devices used to
          access the TRE are fit for purpose and are secured through the implementation of access
          control mechanisms. Further end user security requirements defined by the Host
          Organisation should be listed in this section, along with the means of checking these (this
          may be part of the application for an Approved Project process):





Annex 9
TRE protocol on monitoring use/audit/compliance
          Guidance: The Host Organisation protocol for monitoring access to and use of the TRE
          should be inserted here. It is recommended that the protocol is made publicly available and
          accessible via the Host Organisation website.


Annex 10
TRE output checking policy
          Guidance: This purpose of this section is to define the process the TRE will have in place for
          checking/auditing the anonymous outputs prior to release, and detail disclosure control. It is
          recommended that the policy is made publicly available and accessible via the Host
          Organisation website.






                                                                                                              Page 9 of 11



Annex 11
Output acknowledgement/Publications policy
          Guidance: Requirements for inclusion of acknowledgements in any outputs from the TRE
          using data (including any Data under licence) should be defined here. It is recommended
          that the policy is made publicly available and accessible via the Host Organisation website.


Annex 12
Open sharing of code, syntax, or methodology
          Guidance: Sharing of code, syntax, and methodology, where possible, is encouraged to avoid
          duplication of efforts amongst the research community. Sharing should occur through the
          channels specified here, and ownership detailed. It is recommended that the policy is made
          publicly available and accessible via the Host Organisation website.


Annex 13
Intellectual property rights
          Guidance: Ownership of Intellectual Property Rights relating to source data, linked data,
          derived data, metadata, researcher analyses and Research Outputs may be specified in
          detail here:

 The following example is for reference:
 Intellectual Property Policy - Grant Funding | Wellcome
 Consent and revenue and equity sharing policy - Grant Funding | Wellcome


Annex 14
Cost recovery policy
          Guidance: The Host Organisation policy for pricing and/or recovering costs associated with
          accessing data in the TRE should be inserted here:
 The following example is for reference:
 Pricing | CPRD


Annex 15
Conditions of permitted linkage
          Guidance: Approved Researchers may not attempt to match or link the Data to any other
          data from any other source without express permission. Conditions relating to the linkage of
          datasets held within the TRE and any permitted datasets that may be ingested into the TRE
          (if applicable) are defined here:


Annex 16
Additional terms for sublicensed data
          Guidance: Where the User Organisation is accessing sublicensed linked Data (for example,
          Hospital Episode Statistics from NHS England), the following additional conditions will apply:



                                                                                                            Page 10 of 11



Annex 17
International Data Transfer Agreement
          Guidance: [TBC]



Annex 18
Service Levels
          Guidance: Set out details of agreed availability times and support services provided by the
          Host Organisation. This Annex can be left blank where not applicable.

 Example text:
 Availability
 The Host Organisation shall use reasonable endeavours to provide access to the Data within the
 TRE to the Approved Researchers [through its website] from [time - time] on [working days]
 throughout the Term.
 The Host Organisation may effect maintenance, repairs or updates to the TRE and the Data and
 wherever reasonably practicable shall give the Approved Researchers twenty-four (24) hours’
 notice of any interruption of access to the Data by email. In case of urgent maintenance or repairs,
 the TRE may be unavailable without notice.

 Technical Support
 The Host Organisation will provide technical support to the Approved Researchers from [time-
 time] on [working days] throughout the Term.
 The Approved Researcher will use reasonable endeavours to provide the Host Organisation with
 sufficient information required to answer any query submitted. The Host Organisation will use
 reasonable endeavours to respond to the Approved Researcher’s queries within [specified response
 time] and if the Host Organisation reasonably considers that the Approved Researcher is making
 excessive use of technical support, the Host Organisation at its sole discretion may charge the User
 Organisation a service fee for any further queries submitted.

























                                                                                                             Page 11 of 11
