Side 1 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
Collaboration Agreement 
r
egarding the Societal and Industry-oriented Research Centre with 
the following title: 
“Na
tional Centre for Sustainable Subsurface Utilization of The 
Norwegian Continental Shelf” 
(“NCS2030”)  
(Th
e Research Council of Norway funded project no. 331644)

Side 2 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
This Collaboration Agreement, based upon the contract between the Funding Authority and 
Universitet i Stavanger, is entered into between: 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
Universitetet i Stavanger (Project Owner), org.nr. 971 564 679, 
NORCE Norwegian Research Centre AS, org.nr. 919 408 049, 
Institutt for energiteknikk, org.nr. 959 432 538, 
Universitetet i Bergen, org.nr. 874789542, 
Equinor Energy AS, org.nr. 990 888 213, 
Vår Energi ASA, org.nr. 919 160 675,  
Aker BP ASA, org.nr. 993 250 287, 
DNO Norge AS, org.nr. 913 905 881, 
OKEA ASA, org.nr. 915 419 062, 
Wintershall DEA Norge AS, org.nr. 985 224 323, 
Landmark Graphics AS, org.nr. 971 106 514, 
Schlumberger Information Solutions AS, org.nr. 994 265 873 
hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties”, or individually as “Party”. 
1 Definitions 
A
ffiliated Entity: 
a) entity that is directly or indirectly in possession of more than 50 per cent of the share
capital or voting rights or in some other way exercises direct or indirect control over
o
ne of the Parties (parent company);
b) entity in which one of the Parties is directly or indirectly in possession of more than 50
per cent of the share capital or voting rights or in some other way exercises direct or
indirect control (subsidiary company), or an entity in which one of the Parties controls
50 per cent or less of the voting rights, but none the less has determining influence in
that entity (operator of oil & gas license);
c) entity for which more than 50 per cent of the share capital or voting rights are directly
or indirectly possessed or in some other ways are directly or indirectly controlled by
one or more companies that are directly or indirectly in possession of more than 50 per
c
ent of the share capital or voting rights or in some other way exercise direct or indirect
control over one of the Parties (associated company).
B
ackground: Material contributions or Intellectual Property Rights, know-how and 
information that a Party brings to the Project. The Background provided by the individual 
Party is specified in Appendix 3. 
T
he Board: The supervisory body for the execution of the Project which reports to and is 
accountable to the General Assembly. 
Centre Director: The individual appointed as project manager in the R&D Contract. 
Oversees the progress and implementation of the Project on behalf of the Project Owner.

Side 3 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
C
onfidential Information: Background or any other information disclosed by one Party to 
the other Party(ies) under or in connection with this Collaboration Agreement.   
Commercial Utilisation: Direct or indirect use of Project Results in the development and/or 
marketing of products, services or processes, or the transfer and/or licensing of use of 
Project Results to third parties. Publication through publishing houses is not deemed to be 
Commercial Utilisation. 
D
efaulting Party: A Party that the General Assembly has deemed to be in breach of its 
obligations under the Collaboration Agreement. 
F
air and Reasonable Conditions: Appropriate conditions, including possible financial terms 
or royalty-free conditions, considering the specific circumstances of the request for 
ownership or access. The conditions shall reflect the value of the Project Results or 
Background to which access is requested, financial and non-financial contributions, as well 
as the scope, duration or other characteristics of the exploitation envisaged. The terms of 
the Collaboration Agreement must ensure that any undertakings taking part in the Project 
do not receive indirect state aid, as is set out in the EFTA Surveillance Authority’s guidelines 
for state aid for research and development and innovation Section 28, paragraph b), c) or 
d). 
F
orce Majeure: Unforeseeable and exceptional circumstances which are beyond the 
control of the Party affected, and which cannot be remedied by the exercise of reasonable 
diligence, including without limitation acts of God, acts of civil or military authority, 
governmental orders, war, fire, explosion, labor unrest (except if limited to the Party 
affected) or epidemic. 
F
unding Authority: The Research Council of Norway. 
G
eneral Assembly: The ultimate decision-making body of the Project and shall consist of 
one representative of each Party. 
Governing Body: The Board and the General Assembly of the Research Centre. 
Intellectual Property Rights: All rights to technical solutions, methods, processes and 
procedures, regardless of whether or not these are or may be patented. This also includes 
all copyrights and other rights to trademarks, design, plant species, databases, integrated 
circuit layout designs, drawings, specifications, prototypes, company confidential 
information and the like. 
R
esearch Centre: National Centre for Sustainable Subsurface Utilization of The Norwegian 
Continental Shelf, in short “NCS2030”. The terms Research Centre and Project are used 
interchangeably. 
P
roject: The overall activities covered by the R&D Contract. The terms Project and Research 
Centre are used interchangeably.  
Project Description: Scientific and administrative description of and plan for the 
implementation of the Project, included as an attachment to the R&D Contract.

Side 4 av 35 
«NCS2030» -  Research Council project no. 331644 
Project Owner: The Party designated as Project Owner in the R&D Contract and host 
institution for the Research Centre. 
Pr
oject Period: The time span during which the Project is to be performed, as specified in 
the R&D Contract and Section 2. 
Pr
oject Results: All results produced or achieved through the work carried out under the 
Project, including Intellectual Property Rights, regardless of whether or not the results are 
protected by law. 
R&
D Contract: Agreement relating to a Project between the Project Owner and the Funding 
Authority that comprises a written agreement, general terms and conditions for R&D 
Projects, as well as the Project Description and any supplementary documents, and is 
included as Appendix 1.  
Research Partner: A Norwegian research organisation, defined as such by the Funding 
Authority, being Party to the Collaboration Agreement. 
Sub
contractor: An entity, that is not a Party to the Collaboration Agreement or an Affiliated 
Entity, that supplies goods and/or provides services to the Project on assignment from 
Parties. 
Us
er Partner: Any Party to the Collaboration Agreement from outside the research sector. 
Wor
k Plan: Annual plan that specifies obligations and contributions of the Parties within 
the Project. 
2 Project Period 
Start date: 01.01.2022 
End date: 31.12.2026 
Subject to successful mid-term evaluation of the Research Centre a three-year prolongation 
of the Project will be granted by the Funding Authority:  
Prolonged start date: 01.01.2027 
Prolonged end date: 31.12.2029 
3 The
 Collaboration Agreement  
3.1 The Collaboration Agreement governs the organisation and implementation of the Project, 
as well as the rights and obligations of the Parties.  
3.2 Th
e parameters of the Project, including the terms and conditions for support from the 
Funding Authority, the scope of the support, the Project's objective, the Project 
Description, funding plan and reporting requirements are stated in the R&D Contract and 
any supplementary documents indicated in Appendix 1.

Side 5 av 35 
«NCS2030» - Re search Council project no. 331644 
4 
4.1.1 
The Collaboration Agreement has the following appendices: 
Appendix 1: The R&D Contract, including the requirements and guidelines that applies to 
Societal and Industry-oriented Research Centres  
Appendix 2: Specification of the Project’s fu nding plan 
Appendix 3: Ba ckground 
In the event of a conflict between the R&D Contract and this Collaboration Agreement, 
the R&D Contract shall take precedence. 
Notwithstanding the above, any reference to “Halliburton AS” and "DNO ASA" appendix 1 
shall mean “Landmark Graphics AS” and "DNO Norge AS", respectively, in the context of 
this Collaboration Agreement including appendices. The Project Owner shall be 
responsible for revising appendix 1 in line with this reservation as soon as possible 
following the execution of the Collaboration Agreement. 
Entry into force, duration, and withdrawal 
Entry into force
This Collaboration Agreement enters into force on the date on which it is signed by all the 
Parties, with effect from the start of the Project Period. 
Accession of new Parties to the Collaboration Agreement after the Project has started 
requires the written consent of the Funding Authority and following decision by the General 
Assembly. The General Assembly might also decide on specific terms for accession, such as 
a fee to be paid by the new Party in order to be acceded in Collaboration Agreement. The 
new Party becomes party to the Collaboration Agreement by signing an accession 
agreement, and the Parties hereby grant a power of attorney to the Project Owner to sign 
such an accession agreement on behalf of the Parties. The Project Owner signs the accession 
agreement on behalf of the Research Centre. 
When it is considered to include a new Party to the Collaboration Agreement, the Board 
shal
l assess the need for and propose any changes in the appendices to the Collaboration 
Agreement to the General Assembly. Any such changes will enter into force once the new 
Party has signed the accession document. 
4.2 Dura
tion 
4.2.1 The Collaboration Agreement applies between the Parties during the Project Period, until 
the Project has been completed and the Parties have fulfilled all their obligations under the 
Collaboration Agreement. After this date, the Collaboration Agreement shall automatically 
terminate except for provisions that by their nature are intended to survive termination. 
4.3 Withdr
awal 
4.3.1 A Party, except for the Project Owner, may request to withdraw from the Collaboration 
Agreement, and thus to abdicate its rights and be exempted from its obligations. A request 
for withdrawal must be submitted with a minimum of six months’ notification to the Board. 
The Board will request the approval of the Funding Authority to continue the Project with a 
4.1

Side 6 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
change in composition of Parties. 
4.3.2 The withdrawing Party will still be liable for its share of funding to the Project as specified in 
Appendix 2 up to the end of the calendar year of the effective date of withdrawal. 
5 Governing Bodies 
5.1 The Research Centre’s Governing Bodies are the General Assembly and the Board.  
5.2 General operational procedures for Governing Bodies 
5.2.1 Representation in meetings 
Any member of a Governing Body (hereinafter referred to as Member) should be present or 
represented at any meeting of such Governing Body, may appoint a substitute or a proxy to 
attend and vote at any meeting but is required to keep the chairperson of the respective 
Governing Body informed of their representatives at any given time. 
5.2.2 Convening meetings 
The chairperson of a Governing Body is responsible for convening meetings of that 
Governing Body. 
Governing Body  Ordinary meetings  Extraordinary meetings  
General Assembly  At least once a year At any time upon written request of the Board or 
1/3 of the member of the General assembly  
Board At least twice a year At any time upon written request of any member 
of the Board  
5.2.3 Notice of meetings 
The chairperson of a Governing Body is responsible for giving notice in writing of a meeting 
to each Member of that Governing Body as soon as possible and no later than the minimum 
number of days preceding the meeting as indicated below. 
Governing Body Ordinary meetings Extraordinary meetings 
General Assembly  45 calendar days 14 calendar days 
Board 14 calendar days 7 calendar days  
5
.2.4 Agenda for meetings 
The chairperson of a Governing Body is responsible for preparing and sending to each 
Member of that Governing Body a written agenda no later than the minimum number of 
days preceding the meeting as indicated below. 
Governing Body Ordinary meeting Extraordinary meeting 
General Assembly  21 calendar days 10 calendar days  
Board 7 calendar days 7 calendar days  
A
ny agenda item requiring a decision by the Members of a Governing Body must be 
identified as such on the agenda.  
5
.2.5 Adding items to the agenda 
Any Member of a Governing Body may add an item to the original agenda by written 
notification to all the other Members of that Governing Body up to the minimum number of 
days preceding the meeting as indicated below. 
Governing Body Ordinary meeting Extraordinary meeting

Side 7 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
General Assembly  14 calendar days 7 calendar days 
Board  2 calendar days  2 calendar days 
D
uring a meeting the Members of a Governing Body present or represented can 
unanimously agree to add a new item to the original agenda. 
5.2.6 Meetings by video or teleconference 
Meetings of each Governing Body may be conducted by means of video or teleconference. 
5.2.7 Voting rules and quorum 
Each Governing Body shall not deliberate and decide validly unless two-thirds of its 
Members are present or represented (quorum). 
Each Member present or represented in the meeting shall have one vote. A Party shall not 
vote in decisions regarding its own breach of the Collaboration Agreement and the 
consequences thereof. 
Decisions shall be adopted by two-thirds majority. 
5
.2.8 Minutes of meetings 
The chairperson of a Governing Body is responsible for producing written minutes of each 
meeting which shall be the formal record of all decisions taken. The chairperson shall send 
the draft minutes to all Members within 10 calendar days of the meeting. 
T
he minutes shall be considered as accepted if, within 14 calendar days from sending, no 
Member has objected in writing to the chairperson with respect to the accuracy of the draft 
of the minutes. 
A decision becomes valid and binding for the Parties only after the minutes have been 
approved. 
5
.3 The General Assembly 
5.3.1 In addition to the rules described in Section 5.2 the rules in this Section 5.3 applies to the 
General Assembly. 
5.3.2 Members and chairperson 
All Parties are Members of The General Assembly. 
The chairperson of the General Assembly shall be chosen by and among the representatives 
present at the General Assembly. 
T
he Funding Authority will have observatory status in the General Assembly and shall be 
invited to all meetings, cf. Appendix 1. 
5
.3.3 Decisions 
The General Assembly shall ensure that the Board performs its duties in accordance with 
this Collaboration Agreement. The General Assembly may instruct the Board accordingly. 
The General Assembly is free to act on its own initiative to formulate proposals and take 
decisions in accordance with the procedures set out in the Collaboration Agreement. In 
addition, all proposals made by the Board shall be considered and decided upon by the 
General Assembly.

Side 8 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
T
he following decisions shall be taken by the General Assembly: 
• Content of the Collaboration Agreement, finances, and Intellectual Property Rights,
including:
- Proposal for suspension of all or part of the Project
- Proposal for termination of the Project as a whole
- Proposals for changes to the R&D Contract to be agreed by the Funding Authority
- Major changes to the Work Plan (including Project budget)
- Addition and withdrawals of Background (Appendix 3)
• E
volution of the Research Centre, including:
- Decide on the accession of a new Party to the Collaboration Agreement and
adopt the conditions of the accession of such a new Party, including any Late
Fees
- Declaration of a Party to be a Defaulting Party
- Remedies to be performed by a Defaulting Party
- Termination of a Defaulting Party’s participation in the Research Centre.
5
.3.4 Voting rules and quorum 
In matters which substantially alter the individual Party’s rights and obligations under the 
Project, the decision must be adopted unanimously. Such decisions require all members of 
the General Assembly to take part in the vote. Amendment of the Collaboration Agreement 
and the adoption of annual budgets require the unanimous approval of the Parties. 
A Party is not entitled to vote on a matter regarding its own breach of the Collaboration 
Agreement and the consequences thereof. As for decisions regarding termination of a 
Defaulting Party’s participation in the Research Centre the rules in Section 5.2.7 apply. 
5
.4 The Board 
5.4.1 In addition to the rules described in Section 5.2 the rules in this Section 5.4 applies to the 
Board. 
5.4.2 Members 
The Board shall consist of one representative from each Party to the Collaboration 
Agreement at the time of its entry into force, cf. Section 4.1.1 first paragraph. . 
The Board nominates its chairperson among the Members from the User Partners. 
The Funding Authority will have observatory status in the Board and shall be invited to all 
meetings, cf. Appendix 1.  
5.4.3 Tasks 
The Board shall ensure that the activities described in the Project Description, funding plan, 
and Work Plans are completed within the defined time frame, hereunder that the In-kind 
contributions are delivered as specified.

Side 9 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
F
urthermore, the Board shall: 
• See
k a consensus among the Parties
• Prepare meetings, propose decisions and the agenda of the General Assembly.
• B
e responsible for the proper implementation of the decisions by the General Assembly.
• Monitor the implementation of the Project as well as the deliverables.
• A
gree on the content and timing of press releases and joint publications by the Parties.
• Ap
prove to involvement of Subcontractors.
• R
eview HSE statistics including incidents, accidents, and near misses.
• Appoint representatives to the Technical Committee, cf. Section 6.1.
6 Advisory committees and Centre Administration 
6.1 The Technical Committee  
The Technical Committee shall include a sufficient number of representatives from the User 
Partners to follow up on the Centre’s research activities to give technical input to ensure its 
relevance. 
6
.2 The Scientific Advisory Committee 
The Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) shall consist of international experts. SAC’s main 
tasks are to advise and evaluate the scientific performance of the Research Centre in 
relation to the objective and research plans, including PhD projects. Members will be 
appointed by the Board. In case Confidential Information is to be shared with the members 
of the SAC the Project Owner shall ensure that a non-disclosure agreement is entered into 
between the members of the SAC and the Parties. 
6
.3 The Innovation Committee 
The Innovation Committee will be established by the Project Owner and shall include 
representatives from all Parties. The Innovation Committee’s main tasks are identifying and 
foster innovative solutions from the Project Results and give advice to the Board. The 
Innovation Committee will be led by a representative from the User Partners.  
6
.4 The Centre Director 
The Centre Director is appointed by the Project Owner. The Centre Director is responsible 
for the day-to-day activities of the Research Centre and reports to the Board. The Centre 
Director will be supported by a centre management team consisting of representatives 
from each of the Research Partners, as well as administrative support from the Project 
Owner. 
7 R
esponsibilities of the Parties 
7.1 Each Party shall perform the R&D activity and/or provide the financial or other type of 
support pursuant to the Project Description. 
7
.2 All R&D activities shall be carried out in accordance with commonly accepted research 
practices. The Parties shall comply with all applicable legislation and regulations, all rules 
and guidelines of relevance to the implementation of the Project, and rules and guidelines 
relating to ethical considerations and recognised quality standards and norms. The Parties 
are responsible for ensuring proper practices relating to health, safety and the environment 
are in place for R&D activities.  
7
.3 Research inherently entails uncertainty regarding the results to be achieved, and no Party is 
therefore liable to the others to achieve a specific result or a specific target that has been

Side 10 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
set for the R&D activity, provided that the conditions relating to the performance of the 
R&D activity as specified above have been met.  
7.4 With the approval of the Board, a Party may assign parts of the R&D activity for which it is 
responsible to an appropriate subcontractor. This does not release a Party from its 
obligations to the other Parties. A Party may not serve as a subcontractor for another Party 
to the Collaboration Agreement.  
7.5 In the event a Party does not perform according to the Collaboration Agreement, and 
subject to such Party not rectifying its breach of the Collaboration Agreement within 
reasonable time of having received written notification of such breach by the Board the 
Board may decide to transfer responsibility for the work in whole or in part to another 
Party, based on specified terms and conditions. Such a transfer does not release the Party 
in question from its other obligations according to this Collaboration Agreement.  
7
.6 The Parties undertake a commitment to sign any agreements with owners, employees 
(including individuals with dual employment), partners, subcontractors, and others that are 
required to fulfil the relevant Party’s obligations under this Agreement, including measures 
to ensure the necessary transfer of Intellectual Property Rights. 
7
.7 The Parties shall notify the Project Owner of matters relevant to the implementation of the 
Project. 
8 Work Plan and reporting 
8.1 The Board shall adopt an annual Work Plan for the Project. The Work Plan shall form the 
basis for the technical and financial implementation of the Project in line with the Project 
Description and the funding plan. 
8
.2 The Project Owner is responsible for coordinating scientific and financial reporting to the 
Funding Authority. Parties shall without undue delay submit all Project Results, reports, 
accounting documentation and other documents that the Project Owner requires to fulfil 
its obligations to the Funding Authority. 
9 Payment 
9.1 Distribution of funding 
9.1.1 The Project Owner receives and manages the financial contributions to the Project from the 
Funding Authority and the Parties contributing with cash financing to the Research Centre. 
The Project Owner disburses payments in accordance with the adopted Work Plan, reports 
approved by the Funding Authority and according to the routines set out in Section 7.4. 
9
.1.2 Parties are only entitled to receive payment for the work performed and costs incurred in 
accordance with the adopted Work Plan. 
9
.1.3 In accordance with its own auditing and management principles, each of the Parties shall be 
solely responsible for documenting its own Project costs, both towards the Funding 
Authority and to the other Parties. Documentation shall be provided at the request of 
either the Project Owner or the Funding Authority. 
9
.1.4 A Party using less than its allocated share of the project funds will only receive payment for 
its actual and justified costs, in accordance with the Work Plan. A Party using more than its

Side 11 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
allocated share of the Project funding will only receive payment for the actual and justified 
costs up to the amount equalling that allocated share of Project funding.  
9
.1.5 Disbursed funding that a Party is unable to document as actual and eligible costs in 
accordance with the Work Plan shall be repaid. A Defaulting Party shall also cover any 
direct and immediate loss incurred by the other Parties due to the breach. 
9
.2 In-kind contribution 
Parties contributing in-kind to the Project shall report the actual and justified costs 
associated with such to the Project Owner. Such reporting shall be submitted in accordance 
with the deadline in Appendix 2, or in accordance with what has been agreed in the Work 
Plan. 
9
.3 Invoicing 
9.3.1 The Project Owner shall invoice the Parties for their financial contributions to the Project as 
set out in Appendix 2. 
9
.3.2 The Parties shall invoice the Project Owner every 4 months, in arrears, in accordance with 
the documented expenditures and in line with the Work Plan, unless otherwise specifically 
agreed. Unless otherwise agreed, correct invoices as further described in Appendix 2, shall 
be paid within 30 days of receipt.  
9
.3.3 In the event of delayed payment, penalty interest on arrears shall be calculated in 
accordance with the Norwegian Act relating to Interest on Overdue Payments. 
9.4 Withholding payment and recovery of funding 
The Project Owner may withhold any payments due to a Party identified by the General 
Assembly to be a Defaulting Party. Furthermore, the Project Owner is entitled to recover 
already disbursed and unused funding to a Defaulting Party.  
10 B
ackground 
10.1 The Background considered relevant upon entry into the Collaboration Agreement, 
including any limitations and/or conditions concerning its use, is specified and described in 
Appendix 3. The Party that brought it into the Project will maintain ownership of that 
Background. 
10.2 Any Party wishing to contribute further Background during the Project Period shall notify 
the other Parties of this. Any request to modify a Party’s Background to the Project shall be 
approved by the General Assembly, and relevant appendices shall be updated continuously. 
10.3 Any results from the Project that do not comprise Background pursuant to Appendix 3 and 
are not approved by the General Assembly as Background pursuant to Section 10.2, will 
automatically be assigned the status of Project Results. 
10.4 For the duration of the Project Period, the Parties shall have access at no charge to the 
Background necessary for the implementation of their own work in the Project in 
accordance with the Work Plan.  
10.5 Access to Background necessary for the Commercial Utilisation of another Party’s own 
Project Results, shall be granted on Fair and Reasonable Conditions, and in accordance with

Side 12 av 35 
 
«NCS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
any limitations and/or conditions specified in Appendix 3. Such requests for access may be 
made up to twelve months after the Project Period. 
10.6 Requests for access must be submitted in writing to the relevant Party. The granting of 
access may be made conditional on the acceptance of specific conditions aimed at ensuring 
that these rights will be used only for the intended purpose and that appropriate 
confidentiality obligations are in place. 
 
11 Project Results 
11.1 Ownership to Project Results 
 
11.1.1 Each Party will have ownership rights to the Project Results generated by that Party, its 
employees or suppliers. 
 
11.1.2 If two or more Parties have generated the Project Results collaboratively, and the Project 
Results cannot be separated, they shall have joint ownership of these. The Parties' 
undivided share shall correspond to the respective Party’s proportionate intellectual 
contribution to the Project Results in question.  
 
Parties owning Project Results jointly shall, within six months after the Project Results in 
question were generated, enter into a separate agreement on the utilisation of these 
Project Results, including any protective measures and the distribution of costs relating to 
such. The co-ownership agreement should as a minimum include the following items: 
 
• A clear description of the Project Results, including each Party’s ownership share. 
• Provisions regarding which of the co-owners shall be responsible for protecting and 
maintaining the Project Result, including relevant authorisations. 
• A detailed plan for how the Project Results shall be protected, defended, 
maintained and used, including a plan for Commercial Utilisation. 
 
11.1.3 Parties shall notify the Board of all Project Results. Project Results shall be treated 
confidentially for a minimum period of 30 days from such notification to the Board. 
 
11.2 Access rights to Project Results 
 
11.2.1 For the duration of the Project Period, the Parties shall have access at no charge to Project 
Results that are necessary for implementing their own work in the Project in accordance 
with the Work Plan. 
 
11.2.2 Access rights to Project Results necessary for the Commercial Utilisation of another Party’s 
own Project Results, shall be granted on Fair and Reasonable Conditions. 
 
11.2.3 Research Partners shall have access at no charge to Project Results that are to be used for 
their own educational or research purposes.  
 
11.2.4 All requests for access to Project Results must be submitted in writing.  
 
12 Access rights and ownership rights for new Parties and withdrawing Parties 
12.1 New Parties 
12.1.1 All Project Results produced prior to the time at which a new Party has acceded the 
Collaboration Agreement will be considered Background in relation to that Party.

Side 13 av 35 
 
«NCS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
12.2 Defaulting and withdrawing Parties 
12.2.1 Access rights of a Defaulting Party shall cease immediately from the time that party 
receives the formal notification from the General Assembly that its participation in the 
Project has been terminated but will still be obligated to give the remaining Parties access 
rights to its own Background and Project Results in accordance with the Collaboration 
Agreement. For the sake of clarity, this provision does not affect access rights to 
Commercial Utilisation already granted by a Party to a Defaulting Party pursuant to Section 
11.2.2.  
 
12.2.2 A Party that withdraws from the Project may request access to other Parties’ Project 
Results generated up to the date of withdrawal. 
 
12.2.3 Any Party leaving the Project maintains ownership to Project Results according to Section 
11.1, however the Party shall continue to grant access rights to its own Background and 
Project Results pursuant the Collaboration Agreement as if it had remained a Party for the 
entire Project Period. 
 
13 Publication 
13.1 Project Results shall be published as quickly as possible. Among other things, the 
dissemination measures and communication plans specified in the R&D Contract shall be 
implemented. 
 
13.2 If a Master's degree or Ph.d. is included in the Project, the purpose is for this work to be 
published. Subject to the provisions of this Section 13 and Section 14, nothing in this 
Collaboration Agreement shall be interpreted as preventing the publication of Project 
Results such Master student or PhD candidate is required to publish in order to qualify for 
any degree. 
 
13.3 Given that the conditions stipulated in Sections 13.4 and 13.5 have been met, Parties are 
entitled to publish their own Project Results when such publication does not impair the 
ability of the other Parties to utilise their own Project Results. 
 
13.4 If Project Results have been generated by an employee in an academic position at a 
university or university college, the Act relating to universities and university colleges places 
restrictions on the permanent postponement of publication. The board of the institution (or 
its authorised representative) shall consent to a postponement of publication when there is 
a legitimate reason to do so. Permanent restrictions on the right to publish Project Results 
over and above those laid down in legislation or pursuant to legislation may not be agreed 
upon or stipulated. Project Results shall however not be published if doing so will 
unlawfully disclose Confidential Information and/or business secrets. 
 
13.5 Notification of plans for publication of Project Results shall be submitted to all Parties by 
the Party that has generated the relevant Project Results. Parties have a deadline of 30 days 
from the date on which the notification was issued to object and request postponement of 
the publication.  
 
13.5.1 An objection is justified if (a) the protection of the objecting Party's Project Results or 
Background would be adversely affected, (b) the objecting Party’s legitimate interests in 
relation to the Projects Results or Background would be significantly harmed, or c) the 
proposed publication includes Confidential Information of the objecting Party. The 
objection must include a precise request for necessary modifications.

Side 14 av 35 
 
«NCS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
13.5.2 The objecting Party can request a publication delay of not more than 90 calendar days from 
the time it raises such an objection. After 90 calendar days the publication is permitted, 
provided that the objections of the objecting Party have been addressed. 
 
14 Confidentiality 
14.1 During the Project Period, and for a subsequent period of three years, the Parties are under 
obligation to keep confidential any Confidential Information disclosed to them in 
connection with the Project and store this information in a secure manner. Confidential 
Information shall only be used to perform Project tasks and to utilise Project Results, or as 
agreed with or presupposed by the disclosing Party.  
 
14.2 The Parties shall ensure that all employees and third parties, contractors and 
Subcontractors, who are given access to Confidential Information, complies with the above 
confidentiality obligation.  
 
14.3 The following information is not considered to be Confidential Information:  
a) information already known to the Party in question at the time it was received;  
b) information that is or becomes generally known in a manner other than through breach 
of confidentiality under this Collaboration Agreement;  
c) information received from a third party with no known confidentiality obligations;  
d) information developed by a Party without the use of Confidential Information.  
14.4 The above confidentiality obligation shall not prevent the publication of Project Results in 
line with the provisions of Section 13. Neither does the confidentiality obligation preclude 
the disclosure of Confidential Information to the Funding Authority or the legally mandated 
disclosure to the courts and other public authorities, and disclosure pursuant to the 
Freedom of Information Act. The disclosing Party shall be notified upon such disclosure. 
 
15 Breach 
15.1 If the General Assembly identifies a Party to be in breach of its obligations under the 
Collaboration Agreement, the Project Owner or, if the Project Owner is in breach of its 
obligations, a Party appointed by the General Assembly, will give formal notice to the Party 
with a reasonable deadline to remedy the breach. 
 
15.2 If the breach is not remedied within the set deadline or is not capable of remedy the 
General Assembly may decide to deem the Party to be a Defaulting Party and, in 
consultation with the Funding Authority, determine the consequences thereof. The decision 
of the General Assembly may imply transferring the designated tasks of the Defaulting 
Party to another Party or cancelling the Collaboration Agreement with the Defaulting Party, 
however in the latter case of cancelling the Collaboration Agreement only subject to the 
breach in question being of a material nature. 
 
15.3 Defaulting Parties for which the Collaboration Agreement is cancelled shall ensure that 
conditions are in place for the other Parties to continue the Project, without any right to 
compensation for such assistance.  
 
16 Liability 
16.1 No warranties 
16.1.1 In respect of any information or materials, including Project Results, Background and 
Confidential Information supplied by one Party to another under the Project, no warranty 
or representation of any kind is made, given, or implied as to the sufficiency or fitness for

Side 15 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
purpose nor as to the absence of any infringement of any proprietary rights of third parties. 
Therefore, the recipient Party shall in all cases be entirely and solely liable for the use to 
which it puts such information and materials, and no Party granting Access Rights shall be 
liable in case of infringement of proprietary rights of a third party resulting from any other 
Party exercising its access Rights. 
16.2 Limitation of contractual liability  
16.2.1 No Party shall be responsible to any other Party for any indirect or consequential loss or 
similar damage such as, but not limited to, loss of profit, loss of revenue or loss of 
contracts, provided such damage was not caused by a wilful act. 
A Party’s aggregate liability towards the other Parties collectively shall be limited to the 
Party’s share of the total costs of the Project provided such damage was not caused by a 
wilful act.  
16.
2.2 The terms of this Collaboration Agreement shall not be construed to amend or limit any 
Party’s statutory mandatory liability. 
16.
3 Damages 
16.3.1 Each Party shall be solely liable for any loss, damage or injury to third parties resulting from 
the performance of the said Party’s obligations by it or on its behalf under this 
Collaboration Agreement or from its use of Project Results or Background. 
16.
4 Force Majeure 
16.4.1 None of the Parties shall be held liable for breach of obligations under the Collaboration 
Agreement due to Force Majeure. The Parties shall notify the Centre Director forthwith if a 
situation of Force Majeure arises. If the obstacles have lasted, or are expected to last, more 
than six weeks, or will have serious ramifications for the ability of the other Parties to carry 
out the project, the General Assembly may decide to redistribute the Project tasks. 
17 Ethics, conflict of interest and anti-corruption 
17.1 Each Party is committed to maintain the highest ethical standards in its work for the 
Project. Each Party shall ensure that all of its employees and Subcontractors undertake the 
same commitment. 
17.
2 Each of the Parties shall avoid conflicts of interest in its contact with organisations and/or 
persons performing tasks associated with the Project. 
17.
3 Each of the Parties shall carry out the Project in a manner designed to counter any 
corruption, misappropriation of funding and improprieties. The Parties shall, without undue 
delay, inform the Board if there are indications of corruption and misappropriation of 
funding of which the Party becomes aware during the implementation of the Project. 
Furthermore, the Parties agree, in the performance of the activities under the Collaboration 
Agreement, not to accept or offer any form of gift, offer, payment or other type of 
advantage that entails unlawful or corrupt practice. 
18 P
ersonal data  
The Parties shall comply with all applicable requirements of the EU Data Protection 
Legislation and, if necessary, enter into a separate legal agreement in respect of the 
submission and/or the processing of personal data subject to EU Data Protection 
Legislation.

Side 16 av 35 
 
«NCS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
19 Health, safety and environment 
19.1 Each of the Parties carrying out tasks under the Project shall plan and perform the work in a 
manner ensuring that no lives will be lost, and that there shall be no damage to health, 
facilities and equipment, nor pollution and emissions, and that no production and/or 
processes shall cease to function. 
 
19.2 The Parties are expected to have implemented internal HSE guidelines and a management 
system based on HSE legislation. 
 
19.3 The Parties shall without undue delay report incidents, accidents and near-misses 
associated with the Project to the Project Owner. 
 
19.4 The Project Owner shall without undue delay report incidents, accidents and near-misses to 
the Board.  
 
19.5 A Party performing work at a facility or installation belonging to another Party is obliged to 
follow the existing applicable rules and guidelines of the owner of the facility. 
 
20 Human Rights 
20.1 Each of the Parties shall take reasonable and effective measures to ensure that its 
performance of the Collaboration Agreement respect Human Rights consistent with the 
United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights (2011). To this effect, each 
of the Parties, in connection with performance of the Collaboration Agreement, shall:  
a) take all reasonable steps to avoid, or otherwise appropriately address or remedy, including 
through the establishment of appropriate grievance mechanisms, adverse impacts on Human 
Rights which it or any of its affiliates (the parent company of such Party or any subsidiary of 
such Party or subsidiary of the parent company of such Party), or any officer, director, agent, 
representative or employee of such Party or such affiliates may cause or contribute to;  
b) take reasonable steps to seek to prevent or mitigate adverse human rights impacts to which 
such Party’s or any of its affiliates’ operations, products or services are directly linked 
through a business relationship; and 
c) take all reasonable measures in order to ensure that no officer, director, agent, 
representative or employee of such Party or affiliates take part in or support, whether 
through acts or omissions, Modern Slavery pursuant to the UK Modern Slavery Act 2015 if 
applicable to the Party or any other bodies of law on human rights protection applicable to a 
Party. 
 
20.2 In the event a Party fails to comply with the obligations set out in the section above, such 
Party shall on its own initiative or upon the General Assembly's request, promptly identify 
and implement the actions necessary to cure such breach. 
If a breach of any of the above sections is not cured by such Party within reasonable time or 
repeated breaches of these obligations occur, this shall be regarded as a substantial breach 
of the Collaboration Agreement.  
 
20.3 For the purpose of this section 19, the following definitions shall apply: "Human Rights" 
means all internationally recognised human rights including those set out in the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights (1948), the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 
(1966) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1966) 
(collectively the International Bill of Human Rights), the International Labour Organisation 
(ILO) Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work, applicable standards of 
international humanitarian law, and the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights. 
"Modern Slavery" means all forms of slavery, human trafficking, servitude or forced labour

Side 17 av 35 
 
«NCS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
as defined in article 4 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and 
Fundamental Freedoms (1950). 
 
21 Audit 
21.1 During the Project Period, and for 12 months after the end of the calendar year in which 
the Project is completed or terminated, each of the Parties has the right to audit the Project 
accounts, documents, etc., including information relating to HSE. Such audit shall be carried 
out within normal working hours on the premises of the Project Owner. The Project Owner 
agrees to give the auditors access to all the systems and data necessary to perform the 
audit and shall otherwise ensure that the audit will be carried out effectively and without 
unnecessary delay. All costs relating to an audit shall be borne by the auditing Party(-ies). 
Written notification of an audit shall be sent to the Project Owner, with a copy to the other 
Parties, at least 30 days prior to the planned commencement of the audit. 
 
21.2 If multiple Parties wish to carry out an audit, the audit shall take place concurrently, or, as 
the case may be, by a joint auditing group. The audit shall be carried out in a manner that 
causes the least inconvenience.  
 
21.3 Pursuant to the R&D Contract, the Funding Authority and the Office of the Auditor General 
have the right at any time to verify that the allocated funds are being spent in accordance 
with the R&D Contract. The Parties agree to produce, upon request from the Funding 
Authority and/or the Office of the Auditor General, the receipts, time sheets, calculations 
and other relevant underlying material that are requested in order to carry out such 
verification.  
 
21.4 Any documented deviations presented during an audit and justified by reference to the 
Collaboration Agreement shall be corrected by the Party within a reasonable time. 
 
22 Export Control 
22.1 An exporting Party agrees to comply with applicable rules for export control. If a Party 
performs work, including the export of products, technology and software requiring an 
export licence, said Party shall apply well in advance for the required licences and ensure 
that the other Parties have access to copies with the Export Control Classification Number 
(ECCN) at the time of application submission. A Party shall indemnify the other Parties for 
all fines, costs and any and all liabilities that may arise as a result of said Party’s violation of 
this provision. 
 
23 No representation or partnership 
23.1 The Parties may not commit the other Parties in the Project financially or legally or 
represent themselves as acting on their behalf. Neither this Collaboration Agreement nor 
the participation in the Project shall be deemed to constitute any form of formal 
partnership or joint business activity. 
 
24 Governing law and dispute resolution 
24.1 This Collaboration Agreement is subject to Norwegian law. Attempts shall be made to 
resolve any disputes between the Parties by negotiation or voluntary mediation. In the 
event such attempts fail, the dispute may be brought before the Stavanger District Court 
(Stavanger tingrett). 
 
25 Signatures 
The authorised signatories of each Party have signed the Collaboration Agreement.

Stavanger
01.07.2022

Side 19 av 35
On behalf of: NORCE Norwegian Research Centre AS
Name: 4^j\*5/7^/ U-M LC
Title: Q~T(3
Signature:
lLiall&'iU-____________
Piace:(j4./MDate:
«NCS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644

Side 20 av 35
«NCS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644
On behalf of: INSTITUTT FOR ENERGITEKNIKK
Name: 
Title:
Signature:
Place: Date:
Martin Smedstad Foss
Vice President
Lillestrøm 11.07.2022

Side 22 av 35 
«NCS2030» - R esearch Council project no. 331644 
On behalf of: LANDMARK GRAPHICS AS 
Name: Tomide Togun 
Title: Area Manager 
Signature: 
Place: Stavanger Norway Date: July 26, 2022 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 21032B8F-A53B-43F4-BA8F-06A939152332

Side 23 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
On behalf of: SCHLUMBERGER INFORMATION SOLUTIONS AS 
Name:  
Title: 
Signature: 
Place:  Date:  
DocuSign Envelope ID: A4768DB4-A3A2-4C36-8358-EA6771CA91BE
D&I SCA Digital Manager
Stavanger
Yenny Jaimes
14 July 2022

Side 25 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
On behalf of: VÅR ENERGI ASA 
Name:  
Title:  
Signature: 
Place:  Date: 
Invoice address: 
I
nvoice reference: 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 922B9C0F-E467-43D5-A11B-4830E4162D4E
GJERTRUD HALSET
Vår Energi ASA, P.O.Box 101, 4068 Stavanger  - invoice@varenergi.no
R&D project P521
07-07-22
R&D Manager Vår Energi AS
Stavanger

Side 
26
 
av 
35
 
«
N
CS2030
» 
- 
Research Council project 
no. 
331644
 
On behalf of:
 
DNO
 Norge
 A
S 
Name: 
Title:
 
Signature:
 
Place:
 
Date:
 
Invoice address:
 
I
nvoice reference: 
Ørjan Gjerde
Managing Director
Stavanger
28 July 2022

Side 28 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
On behalf of: AKER BP ASA 
Name:  
Title:  
Signature: 
Place: Date:  
Aker BP specific invoice instructions: 
• Hard copy invoices are not accepted
• EHF is the preferred format for all invoices
• Alternative format for invoicing is PDF format by e-mail
• Invoices in PDF format to be sent to invoice@akerbp.com
• Invoice and attachments must be merged into one PDF file
• Value Added Tax (VAT) if applicable shall be stipulated as a separate item on invoices.
I
nvoice address: 
Aker BP - Accounts Payable 
Postboks 480 Sentrum 
4020 Stavanger 
Invoice reference: 
• Invoice must contain the PO number and the Contract number
• The invoiced amount shall not exceed the corresponding amount on the PO
• Host Institution VAT and/ or organization number(s).
o The invoice should be issued from the same organisational number as listed in the
PO.
o I
f the invoices are to be paid to a factoring company, or another company within the
same Group, this must be clearly stated at the invoice.
• PO number: TBC (a PO will be issued after contract signing)
Failure by Host institution to adhere to any of the aforesaid may result in invoices being returned to 
sender and/or considerable delay in payment. In any such event Sponsor will not be held 
accountable for any loss of interest. 
F
urther information on Aker BP’s requirements for invoicing is located at: 
Suppliers - Aker BP 
DocuSign Envelope ID: CE2A03E9-EDE1-47D9-91DA-2FD2096E1786
Thomas Bognø
07.07.2022 | 12:10 CEST
Vice President Concept Development & Technology

Side 29 av 35
«NCS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
On behalf of: WINTERSHALL DEA NORGE AS
Name: 
Title: 
Signature:
Place: Date: 
Invoice address: 
Invoice reference:

Side 30 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
Appendix 1: The R&D Contract, including the requirements and guidelines that applies to 
Societal and Industry-oriented Research Centres

R&D Project Agreement Document
Article 1: Contracting parties
Between
The Research Council of Norway
Enterprise number: 970141669
(hereafter also referred to as the Research Council)
and
UNIVERSITETET I STAVANGER 
Enterprise number: 971564679
(hereafter referred to as the Project Owner)
a contract has been signed for the following project, described below (hereafter referred to as the 
project).
The following project partners /collaborating partners will participate in the project:
Organizationno. Project partner From date To 
date
Role in the 
project
874789542 UNIVERSITETET I BERGEN 01.01.2022 Collaborating
partner
959432538 INSTITUTT FOR ENERGITEKNIKK 01.01.2022 Collaborating
partner
923609016 EQUINOR ASA 01.01.2022 Collaborating
partner
919160675 VÅR ENERGI ASA 01.01.2022 Collaborating
partner
993250287 AKER BP ASA AVD STAVANGER 01.01.2022 Collaborating
partner
994265873 SCHLUMBERGER OFFSHORE 
SERVICES LIMITED, 
SCHLUMBERGER OFFSHORE 
SERVICES LIMITED
01.01.2022 Collaborating
partner
968967983 HALLIBURTON AS 01.01.2022 Collaborating
partner
985224323 WINTERSHALL DEA NORGE AS 01.01.2022 Collaborating
partner
921526121 DNO  ASA 01.01.2022 Collaborating
partner
915419062 OKEA ASA 01.01.2022 Collaborating
partner
919408049 NORCE Teknologi/Energi 
ROGALAND, NORCE NORWEGIAN
RESEARCH CENTRE AS
01.01.2022 Collaborating
partner
The Project Owner is under obligation to draw up a collaboration agreement with the partners with 
reference to Section 5 of the Requirements and guidelines for Societal and Industry-oriented 
Research Centre and Section 3 of the General Terms and Conditions for R&D Projects.
Project no.: 331644
3 / 15
CLASSIFICATION: IN CONFIDENCE

Article 2: The project
2.1 Project title: National Centre for Sustainable Subsurface Utilization of The Norwegian 
Continental Shelf
2.2 Project no.: 331644
Please specify the project number in connection with all enquiries directed to the Research Council, 
including on payment documents.
2.3 Objective of the project
The primary objective of NCS2030 is to fill knowledge gaps and provide solutions for maximizing 
value creation of subsurface resources to reach the Net Zero Emission (NZE) goals on the Norwegian
Continental Shelf (NCS). 
The secondary objectives are to: 
- Build integrated near field subsurface holistic models for increasing reserve base and evaluate the
potential of geological CO2 and H2 storage;
- Develop new IOR solutions for improved and accelerated HC production at low environmental
footprint;
- Develop data-driven and machine learning approaches to integrate subsurface characterization,
uncertainty quantification and management workflows;
- Recommend field cases with high potential for NZE production;
- Create awareness and acceptance of NCS2030 activities;
- Establish an innovation platform for technology development with industry;
-Attract and train future scientists and skilled professionals for the energy transition and disseminate
results.
2.4 Project description and project summary
The project description for project no. 331644 is provided in the document dated 18.03.2022.
Changes in the project description must be approved by the Research Council. Requests for 
changes must be submitted to the Research Council via “My RCN Web” > “Projects/Reports” > 
“View / Change project”.
The following project summary may be published by the Research Council:
The vision of the NCS2030 centre is to facilitate an energy-efficient, multi-purpose utilization of the 
subsurface into a “Sustainable Subsurface Value Chain”  to reach the Net-Zero-Emissions goals on 
the Norwegian Continental Shelf. Four main research areas are identified, namely Subsurface energy 
systems, Net-zero emission production, Digitalization and Society. The research activities are 
organized into eight work packages (WP): six WPs in research, one WP in education and outreach 
and one WP in management. 
The Centre will: 
- Develop new and improved knowledge of geological plays for both hydrocarbon and renewable
resources, including storage of CO2 and H2, and geothermal energy near field areas;
- Recommend more effective hydrocarbon production solutions with minimized energy and reduced
carbon footprint by integrating renewable energy sources and CCS;
- Develop the next generation of digital tools and methods for improved subsurface characterization,
with multiple scenarios, uncertainty, decision analysis for highly nonlinear problems, large models
and big data;
- Extend the experience of ensemble-based workflows for emission reduction, energy efficiency and
supporting utilization of reservoirs for storage of energy and waste.
Education of professionals with new competencies that will drive the transition is an important 
priority. NCS2030 will enable collaboration between policy makers, field operators, service 
companies, technology providers and academic groups, and will complement established research 
initiatives to create new solutions through an innovation program.
Project no.: 331644
4 / 15
CLASSIFICATION: IN CONFIDENCE

The Centre consists of 4 main academic and research partners (UiS, NORCE, IFE, UiB), 3 national 
(UiT, UiO, NFiP) and 13 international academic collaborators, support from at least 6 major energy 
operators on the NCS, 2 major service companies and 8 innovation/technology companies and 
associations who will ensure high relevance, impact and dissemination.
Article 3: Contract documents and rules of interpretation
The contract includes this signed agreement document and as a minimum the following documents:
 The General Terms and Conditions for R&D Projects (attached)
 Project description (see reference in Article 2.4)
This project will be carried out in collaboration with partners, and a copy of the signed collaboration 
agreement(s) must be attached to this agreement document.
In the event that the provisions of the various contract documents conflict with one another, they 
shall apply in the order of precedence listed above.
Amendments agreed between the parties in writing subsequent to the signing of the contract are also 
part of the contract and will take precedence over other contract documents.
Article 4:  Project management – administrative and scientific
The Project Owner has appointed the following project management:
Project administrator 
Name: Merete Vadla Madland
Title: Prorector for research
Project manager
Name: Alejandro Escalona Varela
Title: Head of department, Professor
Any change of project administrator shall be immediately reported to the Research Council. 
Notification must be submitted to the Research Council via “My RCN Web” > “Projects/Reports” > 
“Change of role”.
Changes of the project manager must be approved by the Research Council. Requests for changes 
must be submitted to the Research Council via “My RCN Web” > “Projects/Reports” > “Change of 
role” and must include the CV of the desired project manager as well as the desired date of 
commencement of duties.
Research performance site at the Project Owner: 
UNIVERSITETET I STAVANGER, Organization number: 971564679
Article 5: Project period and progress plan
The project period is five years:
From the starting date: 01.01.2022 To the date: 31.12.2026
The Research Council of Norway will decide if the project period shall be extended with three years 
(with reference to Section 6 of Requirements and guidelines for Societal and Industry-oriented 
Research Centre). On the condition of a positive decision on a prolongation of the centre after five 
years, the project period will be extended:
From the date: 01.01.2027 To the date of completion: 31.12.2029
Project no.: 331644
5 / 15
CLASSIFICATION: IN CONFIDENCE

The Project Owner is under obligation to carry out the activities listed in the progress plan:
Main activity / milestone From year Quarter To year Quarter
WP1 - Near Field resource evaluation 2022 1 2029 4
M1a Methodologies for quantitative prediction 2023 2 2024 4
M1b Reservoir potential and integrity 2025 1 2026 4
M1c Established models for primary migration 2025 1 2028 4
M1d M2d Reservoirs for geothermal 2024 1 2029 4
WP2 - Reservoir for energy transition 2022 1 2029 4
M2a  Solutions  for  combine  CO2 EOR 2023 1 2025 4
M2b parameters  to  enhance  storage  CO2 H2 2024 1 2025 4
M2c  Modelling  tools  for  CO2 andH2 plume 2028 1 2029 4
WP3 - Net Zero Emission production 2022 1 2029 4
M3a EOR methods with low emission potentia 2022 1 2028 4
M3b IOR Solutions for tight reservoirs 2023 1 2028 4
M3c M4b Improved near-well modelling 2024 1 2028 4
WP4 - Efficient water management 2022 1 2029 4
M4a Water conformance control method cases 2023 1 2025 4
M4c IORSim upgrade 2024 1 2024 4
M4d Field methods demonstration 2028 1 2029 4
WP5 - Digital subsurface for decisions 2022 1 2029 4
M5a Subsurface Knowledge Cloud 2023 1 2024 4
M5b Methodologies for MF uncertainty 2024 1 2025 4
M5c  ML  proxy  models  tested 2025 1 2025 4
M5d  Hybrid  ML-Ensemble  methods 2023 1 2027 4
M5e  ML/MF  calculation  of  BME 2024 1 2026 4
WP6 - Energy policy, economy and society 2022 1 2029 4
M6a Impact  into  the  business  climate 2025 1 2029 4
M6b policy impact of emissions 2023 1 2026 4
M6c Criteria for supporting policy makers 2025 1 2029 4
WP7 - Education and Outreach 2022 1 2029 4
PhDs 9, Postdocs 2 2022 1 2026 4
PhDs 7, Postdocs 3 2026 1 2029 4
15 Scientific workshops 2022 1 2026 4
9 Scientific workshops 2027 1 2029 4
75 Scientific publications 2022 1 2026 4
75 Scientific publications 2027 1 2029 4
5 Energy Conference 2022 1 2026 4
3 Energy Conference 2027 1 2029 4
WP8 - Management and reporting 2022 1 2029 4
M8a NCS2030  start,   all  contracts  in 2022 1 2022 3
M8a Kick-off workshop 2022 1 2022 2
M8b  NCS2030  website  up  and  running 2022 1 2022 2
M8c Midway evaluation by RCN 2026 2 2026 4
M8dFinal center ending event. 2029 2 2029 4
Project no.: 331644
6 / 15
CLASSIFICATION: IN CONFIDENCE

Article 6: Project budgets and funding
6.1 Cost plan
6.1.1 Distribution of project costs by cost category (amounts in NOK 1 000)
The project is to be implemented in accordance with the following cost plan:
2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027
Payroll and indirect expenses 21.687 31.860 37.086 42.080 38.320 34.235
Procurement of R&D services 0 0 0 0 0 0
Equipment 587 957 965 972 981 989
Other operating expenses 2.753 2.753 2.753 2.753 2.753 2.753
Total amount 25.027 35.570 40.804 45.805 42.054 37.977
2028 2029 Amount
Payroll and indirect expenses 32.219 28.480 265.967
Procurement of R&D services 0 0 0
Equipment 998 704 7.153
Other operating expenses 2.753 2.753 22.024
Total amount 35.970 31.937 295.144
Changes in the cost plan must be approved by the Research Council. Requests for changes must be 
submitted to the Research Council via “My RCN Web” > “Projects/Reports” > “View / Change 
project”.
6.1.2 Distribution of project costs by cost code (in NOK 1 000)
Project costs are to be distributed by cost code as follows:
2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027
Trade and industry 3.201 3.202 3.202 3.200 3.202 3.201
Research institutes 16.045 16.551 16.763 16.982 17.207 17.439
Universities and university colleges 5.781 15.817 20.839 25.623 21.645 17.337
Other sectors 0 0 0 0 0 0
Abroad 0 0 0 0 0 0
Total amount 25.027 35.570 40.804 45.805 42.054 37.977
2028 2029 Sum
Trade and industry 3.201 3.201 25.610
Research institutes 17.678 16.534 135.199
Universities and university colleges 15.091 12.202 134.335
Other sectors 0 0 0
Abroad 0 0 0
Total amount 35.970 31.937 295.144
Changes in the distribution between cost codes must be approved by the Research Council. Requests 
for changes must be submitted to the Research Council via My RCN Web> Projects/Reports > 
View/Change project.
Project no.: 331644
7 / 15
CLASSIFICATION: IN CONFIDENCE

6.1.3 Distribution of project costs per partner per main activity (in NOK 1 000)
The distribution of project costs per partner per main activity is to be as follows:
Partner / Activity 01 06 10 14 18 24
UNIVERSITETET I STAVANGER 18.218 6.592 8.471 14.112 20.472 4.985
INSTITUTT FOR ENERGITEKNIKK 9.800 11.111 9.800 9.800 9.800 1.625
UNIVERSITETET I BERGEN 0 11.523 11.817 551 1.653 276
HALLIBURTON AS 1.000 1.500 1.500 1.000 4.000 0
NORCE Teknologi/Energi 
ROGALAND
4.200 20.975 15.505 11.800 23.200 4.850
SCHLUMBERGER OFFSHORE 
SERVICES LIMITED
1.000 1.500 1.500 1.000 4.000 0
Total amount 34.218 53.201 48.593 38.263 63.125 11.736
Partner / Activity 28 37 Sum
UNIVERSITETET I STAVANGER 6.903 25.533 105.286
INSTITUTT FOR ENERGITEKNIKK 200 3.500 55.636
UNIVERSITETET I BERGEN 836 836 27.492
HALLIBURTON AS 0 1.000 10.000
NORCE Teknologi/Energi ROGALAND 400 5.800 86.730
SCHLUMBERGER OFFSHORE SERVICES LIMITED 0 1.000 10.000
Total amount 8.339 37.669 295.144
Changes in the distribution of project costs between the various partners or main activities must be 
approved by the Research Council. Requests for changes must be submitted to the Research Council 
via “My RCN Web > Projects/Reports > “View / Change project”.
6.1.4 Distribution of project costs by partners defined as funding recipients (in NOK 1 000) 
The distribution of project costs between partners defined as funding recipients is to be as follows:
Partner / Activity 01 06 10 14 18 24
UNIVERSITETET I STAVANGER 18.218 6.592 8.471 14.112 20.472 4.985
UNIVERSITETET I BERGEN 0 11.523 11.817 551 1.653 276
SCHLUMBERGER OFFSHORE 
SERVICES LIMITED
1.000 1.500 1.500 1.000 4.000 0
INSTITUTT FOR ENERGITEKNIKK 9.800 11.111 9.800 9.800 9.800 1.625
NORCE Teknologi/Energi 
ROGALAND
4.200 20.975 15.505 11.800 23.200 4.850
HALLIBURTON AS 1.000 1.500 1.500 1.000 4.000 0
Total amount 34.218 53.201 48.593 38.263 63.125 11.736
Partner / Activity 28 37 Amount
UNIVERSITETET I STAVANGER 6.903 25.533 105.286
UNIVERSITETET I BERGEN 836 836 27.492
SCHLUMBERGER OFFSHORE SERVICES LIMITED 0 1.000 10.000
INSTITUTT FOR ENERGITEKNIKK 200 3.500 55.636
NORCE Teknologi/Energi ROGALAND 400 5.800 86.730
HALLIBURTON AS 0 1.000 10.000
Total amount 8.339 37.669 295.144
Project no.: 331644
8 / 15
CLASSIFICATION: IN CONFIDENCE

Changes in the distribution of the various project costs between partners must be approved by the 
Research Council. Requests for changes must be submitted to the Research Council via “My RCN 
Web > Projects/Reports > “View / Change project”.
6.2 Funding plan (amounts in NOK 1000)
The project is to be implemented in accordance with the following funding plan:
2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027
The Research Council 8.153 9.229 10.067 11.355 10.820 10.083
Own financing 4.228 10.073 12.708 15.790 12.301 8.685
Public funding 0 0 0 0 0 0
Private funding 12.646 16.268 18.029 18.660 18.933 19.209
International funding 0 0 0 0 0 0
Total amount 25.027 35.570 40.804 45.805 42.054 37.977
2028 2029 Amount
The Research Council 10.125 10.168 80.000
Own financing 6.278 5.081 75.144
Public funding 0 0 0
Private funding 19.567 16.688 140.000
International funding 0 0 0
Total amount 35.970 31.937 295.144
Changes in the funding plan may be approved in writing by the Research Council and is treated as a 
contractual amendment, ref. General Terms and Conditions for R&D Projects, item 15. Requests for 
changes must be submitted to the Research Council via My RCN Web > Projects/Reports > View > 
Change project.
6.3 Specification of the Research Council’s allocations for 2022 and pledges for upcoming years
Year Up to NOK Limited to persent of approved actual costs
2022 8.153.000 32.6 %
2023 9.229.000 25.9 %
2024 10.067.000 24.7 %
2025 11.355.000 24.8 %
2026 10.820.000 25.7 %
2027 10.083.000 26.6 %
2028 10.125.000 28.1 %
2029 10.168.000 31.8 %
6.4 Disbursement
The Research Council’s allocation for the first year and any pledges for subsequent years will be 
disbursed in accordance with the conditions set out in this agreement and the General Terms and 
Conditions for R&D Projects.
The Research Council will initiate automatic disbursement subsequent to the approval of the first 
project account report.
Once the first project account report has been approved, funds will be disbursed automatically at 
four-month intervals during the first and second interims in the calendar year provided that the 
project is in compliance with the progress and funding plans set out in the contract. Disbursement for
the third interim will be subject to approval of the project accounts report.
Project no.: 331644
9 / 15
CLASSIFICATION: IN CONFIDENCE

Article 7: Reports
The following reports shall be submitted to the Research Council:
7.1 Project account reports
The Project Owner is to submit project account reports for each calendar year. The reports are to 
show the total project costs in relation to the total project funding.
The following cost categories are to be used in the Project Owner's accounts:
 Payroll and indirect expenses
 Equipment
 Other operating expenses
Societal and Industry-oriented Research Centre does not use the cost category Procurement of R&D 
services.
The first project account report is to be delivered at the end of the first full four-month interval after 
project start-up, if possible, and at the latest by the end of the first year of the allocation. For 
subsequent years, the project account report for each year shall be submitted at the latest by 20 
January of the following year.
Forms to be used: Project Account Report available on My RCN web.
7.2 Progress reports
The Project Owner is to submit progress report annually .
Deadline: 1 December
The progress report is to be submitted electronically via “My RCN Web”.
Otherwise, please see Section 6 of the General Terms and Conditions for R&D Projects.
7.3 Final report
Deadline: 3 months after the conclusion of the project period.
The Project Owner is to submit the final report electronically via “My RCN Web”.
Otherwise, please see Section 6 of the General Terms and Conditions for R&D Projects.
7.4 Other reports
The Project Owner is to submit an annual work plan to the Research Council with updated plans for 
the forthcoming year. Deadline: 1 December
The Project Owner is to submit an annual report for the previous year. Deadline: 1 April
Reports and publications that are not compulsory that have been drawn up on the initiative of project 
management shall not be submitted to the Research Council, unless specifically agreed upon. The 
Project Owner is required to store all technical reports and publications for at least 10 years after 
conclusion of the project period. The Project Owner shall assign an ISBN/ISSN number to the 
reports and/or publications, where so required, and ensure that these are sent to the National Library 
in Mo i Rana.
Project no.: 331644
10 / 15
CLASSIFICATION: IN CONFIDENCE

Article 8:   Other special terms of contract and deviations from the 
General Terms and Conditions for R&D Projects
The following special conditions shall apply to this project: 
1. The centre shall comply with Requirements and guidelines for Societal and Industry-oriented 
Research Centre.
2. Special stipulations:
The centre board should consider to carry out a techno-economical preproject of the work package 
2.3 "Geothermal Heat Mining from HPHT Reservoirs" to confirm that the work package is 
appropriate, before the activity is started.
The centre must coordinate the activity with ongoing centres in PETROSENTER or other large 
projects, such as a Norwegian Centre of Excellence (SFF), Centre for Research-based Innovation 
(SFI) or Centre for Environment-friendly Energy Research (FME).
3.  The centre must have three or more partners that are not research organisations and that provide 
funding to the project (user partners). Funding from the Research Council may be a maximum of two
times that of funding from user partners. Both cash contributions and the user partners’ work effort 
(in-kind contributions) can be included. The requirement to collaboration agreement is described in 
Requirements and guidelines for Societal and Industry-oriented Research Centre and General Terms 
and Conditions for R&D projects. The Project Owner is required to ensure that the collaboration 
agreement reflects the terms and conditions of the contract, including that the partners are bound by 
the same obligations as the Project Owner in so far as this is relevant for the partner’s role in the 
project, and that the partners at all times are informed about the contract. The collaboration 
agreement shall specify the financial contribution of each collaboration partner, and at all times 
reflect the funding plan in the contract with the Research Council. The innovation program shall be 
organized as a separate project, and is not a part of the contract and the collaboration agreement
4. State aid will not be granted through the research centre. Undertakings may not receive funding to 
cover project costs. Funding awarded to a research organisation is only to go to the organisation’s 
non-economic activity. The Research Council requires a clear separation of accounts for the 
organisation’s economic and non-economic activities. Ownership of project results must be regulated
to ensure that undertakings participating in the centre do not receive indirect state aid from 
participating research partners. The regulation of ownership must therefore be in compliance with 
paragraph 28 of the EFTA Surveillance Authority’s guidelines for state aid for research and 
development and innovation. This means that ownership of IPR from the project must be allocated to
the different project partners in a way that satisfactorily reflects their work packages, contributions 
and respective interests. The centre activities are to be implemented by means of effective 
collaboration as defined in the state aid rules (see definition in General Terms and Conditions for 
R&D projects). More detail is given in Requirements and guidelines for Societal and Industry-
oriented Research Centre.
5. The Research Council will carry out a midterm evaluation of the centre as described in 
Requirements and guidelines for Societal and Industry-oriented Research Centre.
6. A representative from the Research Council may take part in the centre board meetings with the 
status of observer. The Research Council should receive meeting documents.
7. The project owner should work out a Dissemination plan for the centre. Acknowledgement is to be
made of PETROSENTER and the Research Council of Norway as the funding source in any external
information issued about the project. The project number must be specified. Publication information 
must be obtained from CRIStin. Those who do not have the opportunity to use CRIStin must register 
the scientific publications manually. The project number must be registered in CRIStin.
Project no.: 331644
11 / 15
CLASSIFICATION: IN CONFIDENCE

The following persons are engaged in this project:
Amount Grant/Position
16 Doctoral research fellowship
5 Post-doctoral research fellowship
Name Grant/Position Start date End date Country
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.01.2026 31.12.2028 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.08.2024 31.07.2027 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.01.2026 31.12.2028 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.01.2023 31.12.2025 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.01.2023 31.12.2025 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.08.2022 31.07.2025 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.01.2025 31.12.2027 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.01.2024 31.12.2026 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.08.2022 31.07.2025 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.01.2027 31.12.2029 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.01.2023 31.12.2025 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.01.2026 31.12.2028 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.01.2027 31.12.2029 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.08.2022 31.07.2025 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.01.2025 31.12.2027 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Doctoral research fellowship 01.01.2023 31.12.2025 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Post-doctoral research 
fellowship
01.01.2024 31.12.2025 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Post-doctoral research 
fellowship
01.01.2023 31.12.2024 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Post-doctoral research 
fellowship
01.01.2025 31.12.2026 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Post-doctoral research 
fellowship
01.01.2025 31.12.2026 Norway
NN Navn ikke 
registrert
Post-doctoral research 
fellowship
01.01.2025 31.12.2026 Norway
Project no.: 331644
12 / 15
CLASSIFICATION: IN CONFIDENCE

For research fellowship positions in the project: 
When a research fellow is hired, the Project Owner shall submit confirmation of employment with 
full name, person security number and date of commencement of employment to the Research 
Council, either by progress reporting or by creating a request for changes via My RCN Web. 
Employment must commence during the agreed fiscal year, unless otherwise agreed in writing with 
the Research Council. 
The Research Council’s funding per research fellow will be commensurate with standard rates, and 
will be awarded as a lump-sum allocation per year for the duration of the employment period. The 
parameters for the project will not be upwardly adjusted during the project period.
The Project Owner or, if relevant, a partner has employer responsibility for the research fellow and 
must comply with the rules and guidelines that apply to employers. The Research Council must be 
notified immediately of any changes of significance to the implementation of the project.
Should the Research Council find a fellowship-holder’s progress to be less than satisfactory, the issue
must be raised with the Project Owner, who is required to implement feasible, reasonable measures 
as dictated by the Research Council. In the event the Project Owner finds grounds indicating that the 
fellowship should be discontinued or terminated, the Research Council must be notified immediately.
Discontinuation or termination of the fellowship may not take place without the prior written consent
of the Research Council.
For doctoral fellowships:
The Research Council’s allocation is granted on the condition that the applicant is accepted into a 
doctoral programme prior to commencement of the fellowship.
The organised researcher education that the Research Council funds is stipulated as three man-years.
Mandatory duties, if any, will be funded by and are at the disposal of the Project Owner.
For post-doctoral grant:
In the case of a post-doctoral grant, employment may not commence until the individual's doctoral 
thesis has been defended successfully.
Please be advised that the "Regulations concerning terms and conditions of employment for the posts
of post-doctoral research fellow, research fellow, research assistant and resident" do not give 
permission to extend the post-doctoral fellowship period by more than six months beyond what is 
stipulated in the contract of employment. If an employer expects the extension of the fellowship 
period to exceed six months as a result of an overseas research stay and subsequent extension, 
stipulations allowing for this must be included in the post-doctoral candidate's original contract of 
employment.
Requirements relating to professional development plans for post-doctoral fellowships:
The Research Council’s allocation is granted on the condition that the doctoral thesis has been 
successfully defended and approved. The fellowship is granted for a period of 2 - 4 years. A 
candidate may not receive funding for more than one post-doctoral fellowship period. The Project 
Owner or the research institution where the post-doctoral research fellow is employed is required to 
draw up a professional development plan for the full duration of the post-doctoral period. The plan 
must be submitted to the Research Council at the latest three months after the post-doctoral research 
fellow has been formally employed, and must be signed by the post-doctoral research fellow and the 
project administrator. The scheme applies to all post-doctoral research fellows that have been 
awarded funding under a call for proposals with a deadline after 1 January 2017.
Required submission of data management plans for projects that generate research data
Starting in 2018, all projects that have applied for and been granted research funding will, as a 
general rule, be required to submit a data management plan if the project collects or in some other 
way produces research data. The Project Owner is to use its own internal guidelines for data 
management to assess whether the project requires a data management plan.
Project no.: 331644
13 / 15
CLASSIFICATION: IN CONFIDENCE

Information about the archives and/or data infrastructure(s) where the data are to be stored is to be 
provided in the data management plan and in the final project report.
In the case of projects that generate research data but have not drawn up a data management plan, 
information regarding the archives and/or data infrastructure(s) where the data are to be stored must 
be provided in the final project report.
Archiving of research-generated data
The Project Owner is responsible for ensuring that research-generated data/result data generated in 
connection with projects, and all the necessary documentation for reuse of the data (metadata) are 
stored in secure archives. The data are to be transferred for storage at the earliest possible stage, and 
no later than three years after completion of the project.
Projects that involve animal experimentation
In projects that involve experimentation on live animals, all participants in the project are required to 
ensure that the experiment activities are planned and carried out in accordance with the laws, 
regulations and guidelines governing such tests that are in force at least one EU-/EEA member 
country. This obligation applies regardless of where the animal experimentation is carried out and 
independent of the country in which the performing party is domiciled. The Project Owner is 
responsible for ensuring that all parties involved in the project comply with this requirement.
Requirements relating to medical and health-related clinical trials involving human subjects 
Starting in 2020, the Research Council stipulates special requirements that apply to all calls for 
proposals for medical and health-related trials involving human subjects. This encompasses clinical 
intervention studies, observational studies and preventive and health-promoting intervention studies. 
These requirements apply to projects that require pre-approval by the Norwegian Regional 
Committees for Medical and Health Research Ethics (REK), and that are funded wholly or partially 
by the Research Council. 
The clinical trials are to be registered in one of the following registries: ClinicalTrials.gov or another 
registry approved by the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE). The trial must
be registered before the initial intervention has been administered to the first patient/trial subject, or 
as soon as possible afterwards. Information about the selected registry, trial registration number and 
registration date is to be sent to the Research Council via “My RCN Web” as soon as possible after 
the trial has been registered. This requirement also applies to trials that have commenced prior to 
receiving funding from the Research Council. Trials that are already initiated but have not been 
registered are to be registered at the earliest possible date. All relevant fields in the selected registry 
are to be assessed and updated on an ongoing basis (at least once a year) until the trial is concluded 
and the results have been published or made publically accessible. If the trial is terminated before the
planned completion date, the registry must be updated to indicate the new date of termination and the
number of participants involved in the trial at that time.  
Information that the trial is funded by the Research Council, with reference to the project number, 
must be included in the registration information. 
All clinical trials that plan to include patients/trial subjects in Norway must in addition be registered 
in the list of clinical trials published on Helsenorge, the national health website: 
https://helsenorge.no/kliniske-studier. 
The trial’s registration number is to be included in all publications resulting from the study and in the
article’s summary/abstract.  
See the Research Council’s webpages for more detailed guidelines as well as recommendations 
regarding registry information, costs related to registration and reporting, and the monitoring 
activities of the Research Council.  
Project no.: 331644
14 / 15
CLASSIFICATION: IN CONFIDENCE

Projects of relevance for Svalbard:
The Project Owner is required to register and update project information in the Research in 
Svalbard (RiS) database. Enquiries about the database may be sent to the secretariat of the Svalbard
Science Forum at ssf@rcn.no.
Attachments:
 Requirements and guidelines for Societal and Industry-oriented Research Centre
 General Terms and Conditions for R&D Projects (valid at date of received application: 
15.09.2021)
 Project description
 Copy of signed collaboration agreement
This contract has been approved and expedited electronically.
 
For the Research Council of Norway
Oslo, 04.05.2022
Siri Helle Friedemann
Director
 
 
For the Project Owner:
Merete Vadla Madland
Prorector for research
Project no.: 331644
15 / 15
CLASSIFICATION: IN CONFIDENCE

Approved 4 December 2020 
1 
Societal and Industry-oriented Research Centre 
Requirements and guidelines 
Societal and Industry-oriented Research Centre is an application type variant for focused 
and long-term initiatives at a high international level that strengthen research and innovation 
with a view to value creation and benefits to society. The research centres are intended to help 
increase capacity and expertise through long-term research and/or innovation. Effective collab-
oration is required between research groups and actors outside the research sector, e.g. in busi-
ness and industry, public sector bodies or non-profit organisations.  
A research centre is established for a set period and is affiliated to a Norwegian research organi-
sation, approved by the Research Council, which is responsible for the centre’s activities. Soci-
etal and Industry-oriented Research Centre status is normally awarded for a project period of 
five years, with an option to extend for a further three years.  
In this document, a societal and industry-oriented research centre will be referred to as a re-
search centre or centre. 
This document describes the requirements and guidelines that apply to this application type. 
This document forms an important part of the basis for calls for this type of application and is 
included as part of the contract between the Research Council and the individual Project Owner 
awarded funding. 
1. Key terms
1.1. Terms apply as they are defined in the General Terms and Conditions for R&D Projects. 
1.2. Research partner: A research organisation that is a centre partner. The Research Coun-
cil’s definition and delimitation of ‘research organisation’ will be applied. Norwegian 
research organisations must be approved by the Research Council. 
1.3. Company  partner: Company participating as a centre partner. 
1.4. User partner: Collective term for partners from outside the research sector. This in-
cludes companies, public sector bodies and non-profit organisations. 
1.5. Undertaking: An entity that carries out economic activity consisting of offering goods or 
services on a given market.

Approved 4 December 2020 
2 
2. Delimitations and clarifications
2.1. A Societal and Industry-oriented Research Centre is not a separate legal entity. 
2.2. State aid will not be granted through this application type. All projects carried out by a 
Societal and Industry-oriented Research Centre must be carried out in effective collabo-
ration with the partners participating in the project. 
2.3. The research can be of a basic and/or applied nature, and benefits broad segments of so-
ciety. Research results are to be made accessible through sharing and publication in line 
with the Research Council’s Policy on Open Science (applicable from 2020).1 
2.4. Each centre must have at least three user partners unless another minimum requirement 
is specified in the call. The user partners must be engaged in considerable innovation ac-
tivities of their own and/or have the ability to utilise research results in the development 
of their own organisation. 
2.5. The role of each individual centre partner must be clearly defined. 
2.6. Any subcontractors must be an external source for the client, who is either the Project 
Owner or a centre partner. This means that the subcontractor cannot be part of the same 
group of companies as the client. 
3. Organisation and responsibility
3.1. The centre is to be a part of the Project Owner’s administrative organisation, but must be 
managed by its own board. The centre’s organisation must enable it to effectively 
achieve the objectives specified in the project description, its organisation and manage-
ment form must ensure that the centre is well adapted to the Project Owner’s organisa-
tion and it must establish procedures that ensure good interaction between all partners.  
The centre’s board 
3.2 The Project Owner is responsible for ensuring that a board is appointed for the centre. 
The centre’s board must comprise representatives of the Project Owner, user partners 
and research partners. The centre should have a strong and consistent user focus. Unless 
otherwise specified in the call, the user partners are to have the majority on the board 
and the chair of the board should be a representative of one of the user partners. 
3.3. The board's main responsibility is to ensure that the intentions and plans that form the 
basis for the contract with the Research Council are fulfilled, and particularly that the 
activities set out in the project description are realised within the adopted budget and 
time frame. The board is to ensure good cooperation between the Project Owner and the 
partners. 
3.4. Clear guidelines must be drawn up for the centre’s activities in terms of responsibility 
and authority, including what the board is authorised to do, the rules that apply to board 
1 ISBN 978-82-12-03822-6 (PDF)

Approved 4 December 2020 
 
 
3 
representation etc. The board's mandate must, among other things, ensure that the board 
does not make decisions that interfere with the Project Owner’s area of responsibility. 
 
Advisory committees  
3.2 Unless otherwise specified in the agreement document with the Research Council, the 
centre must have a Scientific Advisory Committee comprising independent international 
top researchers. The committee must be involved in discussions about the centre’s scien-
tific strategy and scientific challenges throughout the project period. The committee can 
also give advice on other issues. 
 
3.6 The centre can also have other advisory committees such as technical committees com-
prising representatives of the user partners. 
 
Centre management 
3.5.  The centre must have joint day-to-day management and one overall research plan that 
corresponds with the project description. It must also have an effective plan for commu-
nication and exchange of personnel between the different parts of the centre. 
 
3.6. The Project Owner must ensure that the centre has a strong management that, within the 
framework of the project description and the funding and cost plan, enjoys great scien-
tific and administrative autonomy. The Project Owner must ensure that the centre has a 
good administrative support system in place. 
 
3.7. The centre will be managed by a centre director or by a centre director supported by a 
management team. The centre director will act as the project manager in accordance 
with the contract between the Research Council and the Project Owner. The director 
must be able to act with autonomy in the scientific context and in connection with re-
cruitment of staff for the centre. The director and, if relevant, the members of the man-
agement team will be appointed by the Project Owner in consultation with the partners. 
A description must be available of the centre director’s authorisations. 
 
Staffing and personnel responsibility 
3.8. The centre is to be developed around researchers who have already proven to have the 
potential to work at a high scientific level. The Project Owner and the partners must 
themselves determine how employer responsibility for the centre staff should be organ-
ised, but the centre cannot have employer responsibility.  
 
3.9. When recruiting staff, the centre must take gender equality into account and actively 
work to attract outstanding researchers. The centre must facilitate staff exchanges be-
tween partners. 
 
Researcher education 
3.10. The centre must encourage and contribute to researcher education in areas where recruit-
ment is important for renewal and value creation. The centre must take steps to ensure 
that students and research fellows can carry out parts of their work with one of the user 
partners. The centre must also ensure that user partner staff participate in the supervision 
of students and research fellows. The Project Owner and relevant partners are responsi-
ble for the staff when the centre closes down and must especially ensure that master’s 
and doctoral degree students can complete their studies according to plan.

Approved 4 December 2020 
 
 
4 
4. Costs and funding 
 
4.1.  The contract between the Research Council and the Project Owner applies for five years 
with an option to extend for a further three years.  
  
 
Cost plan 
4.2.  The Research Council only approves actual costs directly related to carrying out centre 
activities in accordance with the contract. The Research Council’s rules for calculating 
payroll and indirect expenses to be included in the budget must be used. Rules have been 
adopted for the following groups: The university and university college sector, the insti-
tute sector, companies and public sector bodies. Partners’ payroll expenses must be budg-
eted pursuant to the rules that apply to the group the partner is affiliated to. All partners 
must use the stipulated research fellow rates for all years the application covers.  
 
4.3 The Research Council’s grant cannot be used to cover any of the centre undertaking's2 
project costs. This means that they cannot receive state aid through the Research Coun-
cil’s grant, but must cover their own costs.  
 
4.4.  Nor must the undertakings participating in the research centre receive indirect state aid 
through favourable conditions for their collaboration with the research organisations par-
ticipating in the research centre. 
 
Funding plan 
4.5.  The societal and industry-oriented research centre scheme requires the long-term commit-
ment of the user partners. The call for proposals stipulates the minimum requirement for 
funding from the user partners. The Project Owner and other centre research partners can 
also contribute funding to highlight their engagement and the centre’s strategic founda-
tion. Any requirements for own funding on the part of the Project Owner and research 
partners will be stated in the call. 
 
4.6. The board must work to secure funding and necessary expertise for the centre if any part-
ners leave the centre. The Research Council can reduce its grants to the centre if the mini-
mum requirement for user funding is not met after a user partner leaves the centre. If the 
change in partners means that important assumptions that formed the basis for the estab-
lishment of the centre lapse or are significantly changed, the Research Council may termi-
nate its contract with the Project Owner.  
   
 
5. Collaboration agreement 
 
5.1.  The Project Owner is obliged to enter into a joint collaboration agreement with all  center 
partners in the research center. The collaboration agreement must be drawn up in accord-
ance with the Research Council’s agreement document, the Requirements and Guidelines 
for Societal and Industry-oriented Research Centre and the General Terms and Conditions 
 
2 When research organisations engage in research and development in effective collaboration with others, this ac-
tivity constitutes non-economic activity. The EFTA Surveillance Authority considers that R&D carried out by a 
research organisation in effective collaboration with others is part of the organisation’s independent R&D activity, 
as defined in the state aid rules. The research organisation is not considered an undertaking in the context of this 
activity.

Approved 4 December 2020 
 
 
5 
for R&D Projects. The Research Council’s knowledge of the collaboration agreement 
does not mean that it approves any deviations from the contract between the Project 
Owner and the Research Council. 
 
5.2. The collaboration agreement should contain provisions setting out the Project Owner’s 
and partners’ obligation to contribute resources in accordance with the centre’s activity 
and funding plan, rules regarding the right to join and leave the centre, rules regarding 
employer responsibility, and provisions on property rights, utilisation rights, licensing, 
publication of project results and confidentiality. A period of notice of at least six months 
must be given before a partner can leave the centre. 
 
5.3. The Research Council’s General Terms and Conditions for R&D Projects regarding prop-
erty rights, utilisation rights, licensing, publication of project results and confidentiality 
must be used as a basis. The collaboration agreement’s terms and conditions regarding 
these issues must be worded in a manner that ensures that the undertakings participating 
in the centre do not receive indirect state aid, as described in the EFTA Surveillance Au-
thority’s guidelines on state aid for research and development and innovation Section 28 
letters b), c) or d).  
 
 
6. Scientific and administrative follow-up 
 
6.1. The scientific and administrative follow-up described here comes in addition to the re-
porting procedures specified in the Research Council’s agreement document. 
 
6.2. The Project Owner must create a website for the centre to be actively used in external and 
internal communication.  
 
6.2. The Project Owner must ensure that a communication plan is prepared for the centre. 
  
6.4 In principle, research data should be openly available. The Project Owner must ensure 
that a data management plan is prepared in line with the Research Council’s Policy for 
Open Access to Research Data. 
 
Reporting to the Research Council 
 
6.4. By 1 April each year, the Project Owner must draw up an annual report for the previous 
year. The annual report must be written in English, sent to the Research Council and pub-
lished on the centre’s website.  
 
6.5.  By 1 December each year, the Project Owner must prepare and send a work plan to the 
Research Council with updated plans for the forthcoming year. 
 
6.6. The Project Owner must send a final report no later than three months after the end of the 
project period. 
 
Site visit 
6.7. In consultation with the Project Owner, the Research Council must, at appropriate inter-
vals, organise a site visit to the centre to review developments, the centre’s work and 
plans going forward. Representatives of the centre’s board, the centre management, the

Approved 4 December 2020 
6 
centre participants and the Research Council are obliged to be present. The first site visit 
must take place no later than two years after start-up. 
Midterm evaluation 
6.8. The Research Council will carry out a midterm evaluation of each centre within four 
years of start-up of the centre. The elements that will be given particular weight in this 
evaluation are described in the list of key success criteria for a Societal and Industry-ori-
ented Research Centre, which is enclosed with this document. The evaluation will also 
entail an assessment of how the centre will contribute to achieving any thematic objec-
tives and priorities described in the call and how, if relevant, the stipulations for alloca-
tion have been followed up. The evaluation will particularly compare the results achieved 
by the centre with the original project description. The evaluation will also give an assess-
ment of the plans for the centre’s activities during a potential three-year extension of the 
contract. The centres must be given an opportunity to comment on the midterm evalua-
tion. In addition to this evaluation, the Research Council will evaluate the administrative 
situation at each centre.  
6.9. The midterm evaluation, any comments from the centres and the evaluation of the admin-
istrative situation form the basis for the Research Council’s decision to either extend op-
eration of the centre for a total of eight years after start-up or to close it down five years 
after start-up.

Approved 4 December 2020 
 
 
7 
 
Success criteria for Societal and Industry-oriented Research Centre 
In addition to complying with formal requirements, a successful Societal and Industry-oriented 
Research Centre is characterised by the following:  
 
The research 
• The centre is engaged in long-term research at a high international level that is relevant to 
industry and/or benefits society in the field described in the project description.  
• The centre has a clear research profile and has and has been successful in achieving recog-
nition at the international level.  
• The centre incorporates interdisciplinary perspectives in its research. 
• Researchers from both the Project Owner's and the partners’ organisations actively partici-
pate in the centre’s research.  
• The centre’s user partners have increased their research commitments both through partici-
pation in the centre’s activities and their own R&D activities on topics of relevance to the 
centre.  
 
Innovation, value creation and benefits to society 
• The centre’s research has generated or is expected to generate opportunities for innovation 
and/or increased competitiveness among user partners, as well as expectations of social rip-
ple effects in society beyond the partners directly participating in the centre’s activities. 
• The centre can document that its research results have helped to address challenges and ex-
ploit opportunities in the centre’s thematic areas. 
• There is expedient mutual staff mobility between the centre’s research partners and user 
partners.  
• The centre encourages innovation and defines, maps and follows up research results with 
innovation potential. 
• The centre has implemented measures to ensure that the expertise and results achieved 
through its research can be used effectively by the partners. 
• The centre has taken steps to ensure that results, including results that fall outside the user 
partners’ core areas, can be commercialised through user partners, research-based business 
start-ups or in other ways. 
 
Internationalisation 
• Through the centre collaboration, the partners work actively to become involved and pro-
mote their activities in international research arenas, including the EU’s framework pro-
gramme. 
• The centre is engaged in active collaboration with international research groups and has also 
contributed to the internationalisation of Norwegian research and industry in other ways. 
• There is mutual mobility between the centre and outstanding foreign research groups. 
• The centre attracts outstanding foreign researchers. 
 
Researcher education and recruitment 
• If relevant, the centre offers high-quality researcher education.  
• The centre helps to strengthen recruitment, also at master’s level, to the centre’s field of re-
search and, if relevant, contributes to research-based teaching. 
• The centre contributes to gender balance and diversity in researcher education and recruit-
ment. 
• The centre’s research contributes to higher quality of education in the centre’s thematic ar-
eas and disciplines.

Approved 4 December 2020 
8 
Partners and funding 
• The Project Owner and the partners have a long-term commitment to the centre. The com-
pany partners have increased their funding above the minimum requirement.
• Active and targeted endeavours are made to strengthen the composition of centre partners.
• The centre’s participants succeed in winning competitions for national and international
R&D funds.
Organisation 
• The centre has a high profile and clear identity and enjoys successful collaboration with its
partners.
• The centre’s board and management contribute to the follow-up of the intentions and plans
that formed the basis for the centre’s establishment.
• The centre has succeeded in creating added value as a centre where synergies are secured
between different work packages to achieve common goals.

General Terms and Conditions for R&D Projects
The General Terms and Conditions for R&D Projects constitute an integral part of all 
R&D project contracts with the Research Council of Norway and apply unless 
otherwise agreed in writing.
The following general terms and conditions apply as from 1 January 2021. 
1 Key terms
Project administrator: The individual who is authorised to represent and assume obligations on 
behalf of the Project Owner in respect of the Research Council. If the Project Owner has designated a
specific contract administrator, then this individual will assume the role of the project administrator 
with regard to authorisation to accept and/or amend the agreement documents for all R&D projects 
which the Project Owner has established with the Research Council of Norway.
Agreement document: The document that is signed by the parties and that contains the agreed-upon 
specifications and stipulations for the project.
Allocation: The Research Council’s approved funding of a project, which is binding for one budget 
year at a time.
Direct costs: Costs that are directly attributable to the implementation of the project.
Effective collaboration: Collaboration between at least two independent parties to exchange 
knowledge or technology, or to achieve a common objective based on the division of labour, where 
the parties jointly define the scope of the collaborative project, contribute to its implementation and 
share its risks, as well as its results. One or several parties may bear the full costs relating to the 
project and thus relieve other parties of its financial risks. Contract research and provision of research
services are not considered forms of collaboration.
Funding plan: A plan indicating how the project costs will be financed throughout the project 
period.
Force majeure: Unforeseeable or exceptional circumstances beyond a party’s control.
Research-generated data: Registered records, notes and reported information in the form of 
numbers, text, visual and audio files that are generated by or emerge in the course of the research 
project.
Norges forskningsråd/
The Research Council of Norway
Drammensveien 288
Postboks 564 
NO-1327 Lysaker
Telefon  +47 22 03 70 00
Telefaks +47 22 03 70 01 
post@forskningsradet.no
www.forskningsradet.no
Org.nr. 970141669
All post og e-post som inngår i 
saksbehandlingen, bes adressert 
til Norges forskningsråd og ikke 
til enkeltpersoner.
Kindly address all mail and e-mail 
to the Research Council of Norway,
not to individual staff.

Research infrastructure: Facilities, resources and related services that are used by the scientific 
community to conduct research in their respective fields and covers scientific equipment or sets of 
instruments, knowledge-based resources such as collections, archives or structured scientific 
information, enabling information and communication technology-based infrastructures such as 
grids, computing, software and communication, or any other entity of a unique nature essential to 
conduct research.
 
Such infrastructures may be ‘single-sited’ or distributed’ (an organised network of resources).
 
R&D: Research and development
 
R&D provider: An entity that, pursuant to the agreement document, will deliver R&D work on 
assignment for the Project Owner and/or any partners.
 
Progress plan: Plan for the performance of the project’s activities, including secondary objectives 
and milestones.
 
Intellectual property rights: Patents and all other rights to technical solutions, methods, processes, 
procedures, drawings, prototypes, specifications, design, circuit layout drawings and trade secrets, 
regardless of whether or not these are or may be patented or registered as well as all copyrights, 
database rights and other similar rights, rights to trademarks, domains, and other distinguishing 
business identification marks, and rights protected under the Act relating to the control of marketing 
and contract terms and conditions, etc. (Marketing Control Act), regardless of whether these are or 
may be registered.
 
Indirect costs: Costs that are associated with the project’s proportional use of resources that are not 
directly attributable to the implementation of the project.
 
Commercial utilisation: Direct or indirect use of project results in the development and/or 
marketing of products, services or processes, or the transfer and/or licensing of use of project results 
to third parties. Publication through publishing houses is not defined as commercial utilisation.
 
Contract: The R&D Project Agreement Document, the project description and the General Terms 
and Conditions for R&D Projects, as well as any specified supplementary documents.
 
Contract administrator: A designated individual who is authorised to accept and/or amend the 
agreement document for all R&D projects which the Project Owner has established with the 
Research Council.
 
Cost plan: A list of the overall budgeted project costs for the project period distributed by cost 
category.
 
2 / 14

Party/Parties: The Project Owner and the Research Council, individually or together.
Project: The overall activities covered by the contract.
Project Owner: The entity that is responsible vis-à-vis the Research Council for ensuring that the 
project is carried out in accordance with the contract, receives the Research Council’s allocation on 
behalf of itself or any partners, and that is otherwise obligated under the contract.
Background: The knowledge, including intellectual property rights, that the Project Owner and 
partners bring into the project.
Project description: Scientific and administrative description of and plan for the implementation of 
the project.
Project funding: Resources that are made available to cover the project costs.
Project costs: Direct and indirect costs associated with the implementation of a project.
Project manager: The individual who is in charge of the progress and performance of the project on 
behalf of the Project Owner.
Project partner: Project Owner, partner and R&D provider.
Project period: The time span during which the project is to be performed, as specified in the 
agreement document.
Project accounts: Accounts detailing the project costs and project funding.
Project results: All results produced or achieved in connection with the project, including 
intellectual property rights, regardless of whether or not the results are protected by law.
Project summary: Short scientific description of the project that may be made available to the 
public.
Collaboration agreement: Agreement regulating among other things the approach, distribution of 
tasks and rights and obligations between the Project Owner and the partners.
Partners: The entities that, in accordance with the agreement document, are to perform the project in
effective collaboration with the Project Owner and, if relevant, other partners.
3 / 14

Sign/signing: Electronic acceptance of the contract on ‘My RCN Web’ in the Research Council’s 
online application administration system and/or the physical signature on the agreement document.
 
Pledge: A conditional promise of funding from the Research Council to the project.
 
Sub-contractor: An actor who supplies goods and/or provides services to the project on assignment 
from the Project Owner and/or any partners, and who is not a partner or an R&D provider.
 
4 / 14

2 The project
2.1 Project implementation
The project shall be carried out in accordance with the contract.
In cases where the Research Council has approved the grant application without requiring any special
agreement document, the project shall be implemented in accordance with the grant application and 
the General Terms and Conditions for R&D Projects issued by the Research Council.
The Project Owner is required to comply with the applicable statutory framework and other public 
regulations, ethical guidelines as well as recognised quality standards and norms for good research 
practice.
2.2 R&D providers
The Project Owner and/or partners can enter into agreements with R&D providers in accordance with
the framework that follows from the contract.
The use of R&D providers does not exempt the Project Owner from its obligations and liability 
pursuant to the contract.
The Project Owner is required to ensure that R&D providers comply with the rights and obligations 
that follow from the contract.
Any changes in the composition of R&D providers as outlined in the agreement document will 
require the prior written approval of the Research Council.
The Project Owner is obliged to ensure that the R&D providers deliver their services on terms and 
conditions that ensure that the Project Owner and partners do not receive indirect state aid from the 
R&D provider, in accordance with the EFTA Surveillance Authority’s guidelines on state aid for 
research and development and innovation.
2.3 Subcontractors
The Project Owner and/or any partners can enter into agreements with subcontractors in accordance 
with the framework that follows from the contract.
The use of R&D providers does not exempt the Project Owner from its obligations and liability 
pursuant to the contract.
Subcontractors may not be granted any rights to project results.
The Project Owner is required to ensure that subcontractors comply with the rights and obligations 
that follow from the contract.
3 Projects in collaboration with partners
In projects carried out in collaboration with partners, the Project Owner shall represent the partners 
vis-à-vis the Research Council.
The Project Owner is required to sign a collaboration agreement with the partners. Unless otherwise 
agreed in writing, the collaboration agreement is to be completed within three months after the 
Research Council has sent the contract to the Project Owner, and must have been received before the 
Research Council will disburse any funds.
The collaboration agreement is to govern the reciprocal rights and obligations of the Project Owner 
and respective partners, including distribution of project costs, ownership of research infrastructure 
and rights, etc., pertaining to research results, cf. Section 8.3.
5 / 14

The Project Owner is required to ensure that the collaboration agreement reflects the terms and 
conditions of the contract, including that the partners are bound by the same obligations as the 
Project Owner in so far as this is relevant for the partner’s role in the project, and that the partners at 
all times are informed about relevant elements of the contract. The Project Owner must, among other 
things, ensure that the allocation is used in accordance with the contract, and that the partners that 
receive funding keep and submit cost accounts to the Project Owner as a basis for the preparation of 
project accounts that meet the requirements set out in the contract, cf. Section 6.
Collaboration shall take place on terms and conditions that ensure that neither the Project Owner nor 
the partners receive indirect state aid, in accordance with the EFTA Surveillance Authority’s 
guidelines on state aid for research and development and innovation.
The Research Council may stipulate special requirements pertaining to collaboration between 
partners.
The signing of the collaboration agreement in no way changes the Project Owner’s responsibility 
pursuant to the contract.
The collaboration agreement shall establish the right of the Research Council to exercise the rights of
the Project Owner pursuant to the collaboration agreement in so far as this is necessary in order for 
the Research Council to exercise its rights under the contract (including provisions on duty of 
secrecy, verification and auditing, etc.).
Any changes in the composition of the partners as outlined in the agreement document will require 
the prior written approval of the Research Council.
4 Disbursement, transfers and reservations
4.1 Disbursement
Funding will not be disbursed until the contract has been signed by both parties and received by the 
Research Council along with copies of any collaboration agreements, and information about the 
Project Owner’s bank account number has been conveyed to the Research Council in the manner 
specified. Funding will be paid into the bank account number that has been provided. 
Unless otherwise agreed in writing, funds will be disbursed automatically at four-month intervals 
based on the agreed funding plan and the Research Council’s allocation, as set out in the agreement 
document.
The Research Council will not disburse the final payment until the final report and/or annual 
accounting report has been submitted and approved, cf. Section 7.3
4.2 Termination of disbursement
The Research Council can stop any further payments if the Research Council finds that the 
implementation of the project deviates from the contract, or if other circumstances so indicate, cf. 
Section 4.7.
4.3 Transfer of unused funds from a fiscal year
On the basis of a request from the Project Owner citing reasons why it is justified, the Research 
Council may consent to the carrying forward of unused funding from one fiscal year to the next. The 
Project Owner must submit its request to the Research Council at the latest by the end of calendar 
year to which the grant applies.
In the event consent is not given for the unused funding to be carried forward, this amount will be 
deducted from the total allocated sum. If the funding has already been disbursed, the Research 
Council may reduce the following year's disbursement by a corresponding amount or require 
reimbursement of the unused funds.
6 / 14

4.4 Reduced payment and reimbursement of unused funds due to lower project costs
If the project costs are lower than the amounts indicated in the cost plan, then any remaining 
undisbursed funds will not be paid out. Disbursed funding in excess of the Research Council’s agreed
proportion of the project costs shall be repaid to the Research Council in the manner that it specifies.
4.5 Reimbursement as a result of incorrect disbursement
If the Research Council has disbursed a higher amount than what follows from the allocation, the 
Project Owner shall repay the difference immediately. Unless the incorrect disbursement is due to 
conditions on the part of the Research Council, interest accrues in accordance with the Act relating to
Interest on Overdue Payments etc. (LOV-1976-12-17-100) from the date on which the Project Owner
received the funds.
4.6 Offsetting
The Research Council may recover overpayment of funding by offsetting the amount against 
remaining payments or other claims that the Project Owner may have vis-à-vis the Research Council,
including undisbursed funding in other projects. This applies regardless of the date on which the 
claim arose or fell due.
4.7 Reservations
Allocations are made for one fiscal year at a time. Any pledges for subsequent years are not binding 
on the Research Council unless specifically stated in the agreement document.
Disbursement of the grant for Year 1 and honouring of any pledges for subsequent years are 
contingent on there being no changes in public regulations (rules, standards, legislation, etc.), and 
that no other unforeseen circumstances have arisen that will have a major impact on the 
implementation of the project, or the Research Council’s ability to contribute to it.
The Research Council will honour its pledge for subsequent years contingent on the following 
stipulations, among others:
 That no deviations from the contract and/or breach of contract have occurred
 The Research Council approves the progress report for the project and any requests to
change the approved project framework, cf. Section 7.2.
In the event one or more of these conditions is not satisfied, the Research Council may stop or 
change any future allocations or pledges. Furthermore, the Research Council may require repayment 
of all or part of the disbursed allocation, or decide to cancel the contract pursuant to Section 18, if 
this is warranted under the circumstances.
5 Eligible project costs
Only direct and indirect costs that are necessary to the implementation of the project and that are 
included in the cost plan may be charged to the project.
6 Accounting
The Project Owner is to keep a separate project account specifying project funding and project costs.
Project funding and project costs must appear in the Project Owner’s formal accounts. The accounts 
shall be kept current. Under all circumstances, information of significance to the preparation of 
compulsory reports stipulated in the contract must be recorded within the deadlines that apply to such
reporting. Project accounts must satisfy the requirements set out by the Research Council in its 
relevant guidelines, and must be in accordance with good accounting practice and commonly 
accepted accounting principles.
7 / 14

7 Reports
7.1 In general
The Project Owner is required to prepare and submit reports within the stipulated deadlines, in the 
manner and format specified by the Research Council. The information shall be up-to-date and meet 
the Research Council's guidelines applicable at all times.
All changes and deviations to the project and the contract shall be reported to the Research Council 
unsolicited and without undue delay in the format specified by the Research Council.
The Project Owner shall store the final report and project data in a safe and secure manner for at least
10 years after the conclusion of the contract period.
7.2 Progress reports and notifications of changes to the project framework
In the progress report, the Project Owner is to provide information regarding the project results 
achieved.
The progress report and any notifications of changes to the project framework must be approved by 
the Research Council before the allocation can be disbursed and/or funding pledges will be 
honoured, cf. Section 4.7.
7.3 Final reports
Unless otherwise agreed in writing, the Project Owner is to submit the final report to the Research 
Council by at the latest one month after the conclusion of the project period.
The Project Owner is to provide the name of the archives or data infrastructure to be used for storing 
the research data/output data generated in connection with the project that may be relevant for reuse, 
and all the necessary documentation for reuse of the data (metadata).
Projects that have submitted a data management plan must append the latest version of this plan to 
the final report.
The final report must be approved by the Research Council.
7.4 Other reports
Within reason, the Research Council is entitled to request additional reports covering shorter periods 
of time or specific parts of a project.
For certain types of projects, the Research Council requires the submission of an annual project 
account report. This will in such case be specified in the agreement document.
Upon the request of the Research Council, and to the degree possible, the Project Owner and partners
are required to contribute at no charge to the Research Council’s evaluation of the project and 
measurement of results. This evaluation includes an assessment of the scientific and economic 
significance of the project’s results. Unless otherwise agreed in writing, the Project Owner will be 
under obligation to contribute in this way for a period of up to 10 years from submission of the final 
report.
The Project Owner is also required to submit account information and any other statistical data 
relating to the project to the national research statistics authorities.
8 Employer responsibility
The Project Owner has employer responsibility for all its own staff members who are affiliated with 
the project.
8 / 14

9 Right of ownership, utilisation rights and licensing
9.1 Research infrastructure
The Project Owner has ownership of research infrastructure purchased with project funds in projects 
without partners. In projects involving collaboration with partners, the ownership of the research 
infrastructure shall be regulated in the collaboration agreement, cf. Sections 3 and 9.3.
The Project Owner and, if relevant, any partners with ownership rights to the infrastructure, is 
required to ensure that the research infrastructure is adequately insured and kept operational and in 
good working order during the contract period. 
9.2 Project results
Rights
The Project Owner and any partners must obtain the rights to commercial utilisation of the project 
results, and are required when necessary to sign agreements with owners, employees (including 
individuals with multiple employers), subcontractors and others to achieve this.
The obtainment of such rights is not intended to limit the protection accorded the rights holder’s 
moral rights pursuant to the Norwegian Copyright Act, nor does it preclude agreements regarding 
remuneration schemes for rights holders corresponding to those that apply to employees’ patentable 
inventions pursuant to the Act respecting the right to employees’ inventions.
The Project Owner shall ensure open access to scientific publications relating to the project results, 
including that the Project Owner, partners and/or authors shall retain sufficient intellectual property 
rights to meet the open access requirements, which are described in more detail in Section 10. 
Among other things, this means that the Project Owner, partners and/or authors shall retain the 
unconditional right to make the final version of a manuscript following a peer review (AAM) and/or 
the publisher’s published version (VoR) of a scientific article available under an open licence through
an open archive, immediately on publication by the publisher.
Protection
The Project Owner and any partners must assess the need to protect project results that may have 
commercial value and, when so indicated, take suitable protective action. Where legislation requires 
that rights must be registered to obtain protection, such registration shall be carried out.
Utilisation
The project results must be utilised within a reasonable period of time, given the characteristics of 
the particular industry or market, the specific field of research, and the relevant product’s 
development time-frame, useful economic life and utilisation opportunities. If the party holding the 
rights to the project results does not achieve such utilisation, the persons who have produced the 
project results may demand that the rights are transferred to them, unless a different agreement is in 
place between the Project Owner and those same persons, or between the various parties involved in 
projects in collaboration with partners, cf. Sections 3 and 9.3. This does not apply, however, in cases 
where:
 measures to achieve utilisation have been launched and are underway; or
 the rights holder’s lack of utilisation of a project result is of commercial significance
for the utilisation of the rights holder’s other project results
Transfer of project results to a foreign legal entity
The transfer of ownership and/or licensing of exclusive rights to project results to a third party who is
not a partner, and who is in a country outside the European Economic Area, may not take place 
without the written approval of the Research Council. The Research Council may refuse to allow 
transfers/licensing agreements if they are in conflict with national economic interests, ethical 
principles or considerations relating to the safety of the realm. Alternatively, the Research Council 
9 / 14

may stipulate conditions for the proposed transfers/licensing agreements. A request may be 
considered approved if the Research Council has not responded within four weeks of receipt of 
written notification. This provision applies for the duration of the project period and for three years 
after the project has been concluded.
Changes in ownership – foreign owners
The Research Council shall be notified immediately and in writing if a person or an undertaking 
outside the European Economic Area assumes a controlling interest in the Project Owner through the 
acquisition of a stake in the enterprise (shares, etc.), by agreement or by other means. The Project 
Owner is also required to notify the Research Council immediately and in writing if a person or an 
undertaking outside the European Economic Area assumes a controlling interest over any of the 
partners after a contract has been signed.
If the changes in ownership entail that the project results may be used in conflict with national 
economic interests, ethical principles or considerations relating to the safety of the realm, the 
Research Council is entitled to impose conditions on the project and project results, including that the
Project Owner shall wholly or partially transfer the project results exclusively to the Research 
Council. The Research Council may also cancel the agreement document and require reimbursement 
for disbursed allocations pursuant to Section 17 and 18. This provision applies for the duration of the 
project period and for three years after the project has been concluded.
9.3 Supplementary provisions for projects in collaboration with partners
The collaboration agreement between the parties, cf. Section 3, is to regulate ownership of 
infrastructure, and the rights to, protection of and use of project results, as well as use of, and any 
compensation for, the background and any research infrastructure brought into the project.
The following principles are to be adhered to:
 For the duration of the project period, the Project Owner and partners must have the
right to use, at no charge, all project results that are necessary for implementing their own
work in the project.
 The Project Owner and partners must have the right to use project results and
background brought in according to the agreed-upon terms, when this is necessary for
commercial utilisation of the project results to which they themselves have rights under the
project.
10 Publication and archiving
10.1 Publication of project results
Unless otherwise stipulated below, the Project Owner is required to make the project results public as
quickly as possible. This includes ensuring that the dissemination measures and plans specified in the
contract are implemented.
If publication of project results will interfere with the protection or commercial utilisation of the 
project results, the publication may be temporarily postponed until such protection or commercial 
utilisation has been achieved.
In special cases, the Research Council may give its written consent to the imposition of permanent 
secrecy on the project results. This does not apply to projects with participants from the university 
and university college sector, as it is in contravention of the Act relating to universities and university
colleges.
Research-generated data must be made publicly available after the conclusion of the project, unless 
special circumstances indicate otherwise, or unless this is prevented by the terms and conditions of 
the contract or other public rules.
10 / 14

The Project Owner shall ensure that all scientific publications about or based on project results that 
are written by authors affiliated to the Project Owner or the partners, are published in accordance 
with the Research Council’s requirements for such publications at all times, available at 
https://www.forskningsradet.no/en/Adviser-research-policy/open-science/apen-tilgang-til-
publikasjoner/. Among other things, this means that scientific articles shall be made immediately 
available online with open access under a Creative Commons Navngivelse CC BY 4.0 licence unless 
otherwise agreed with the Research Council.
10.2 Archiving of project results
The Project Owner shall ensure that all research- generated data, including all data that forms the 
basis for publications, is stored in a secure digital archive. Such archiving is to be carried out as soon 
as possible and at the latest two years following the conclusion of the project period. The Research 
Council may require that all such data, including the necessary documentation for reuse of data 
(metadata), is stored in designated, secure national or international archives.
The Project Owner is under obligation to ensure that a copy of peer-reviewed scientific publications 
based on research that is wholly or partially funded by the Research Council is stored in appropriate, 
open-access archives immediately on publication by the publisher. The archived version shall be the 
last version of the manuscript following peer review (AAM) and/or the publisher’s published version
(VoR).
10.3 Publication of project information
The Project Owner and any partners are required to make reference to the Research Council’s 
support in any external information issued about the project.
The Research Council has the right to publish the name of the Project Owner and project manager, 
the project title, the duration of the project, the project summary, the popular science presentation and
the amount of its allocation.
The Research Council may publish project results that are reported in connection with the progress 
and final reports unless the information has been designated as confidential.
Within reason, the Research Council is entitled to require that the Project Owner establishes a 
website for the project and takes part in relevant seminars, conferences and other dissemination and 
networking measures.
 
11 Confidentiality
The Research Council is required to comply with the Freedom of Information Act of 19 May 2006 
No. 16 and the provisions relating to duty of secrecy under the Public Administration Act of 10 
February 1967.
12 Transfer
The Project Owner may not transfer, mortgage or in any other way convey the use of the contract, or 
portions of the contract, including allocations and pledges from the Research Council, without the 
prior written consent of the Research Council.
 
13 Indemnification and discharge of liability
The Project Owner bears liability for ensuring that the performance of the project does not violate the
rights of any third parties, including the third party’s copyrights and other intellectual property rights,
or can in any other way lead to claims from a third party.
11 / 14

The Project Owner shall indemnify the Research Council against any claims resulting from the 
Project Owner’s performance of the project, including claims related to infringements of intellectual 
property rights.
The Research Council bears no legal or financial liability for injuries or losses ensuing from e.g. 
defects in or non-proficient use of equipment, methods or programmes associated with the project.
14 Force majeure
Either party shall notify the other party without undue delay should a situation of force majeure 
prevent that party from fulfilling its obligations under the contract.
None of the parties is to be held liable for a breach of contract if the inability to fulfil its obligations 
is due to force majeure.
Should force majeure entail a risk that the project cannot be performed in accordance with the 
contract, the parties shall meet to negotiate any contract adjustments that might be required. Should 
the parties fail to agree on such adjustments, the Research Council is entitled to stop payment of the 
allocation until the situation of force majeure is resolved.
If the situation of force majeure is expected to last, or has lasted, for more than 90 days, each of the 
parties may terminate the contract with one month’s notice.
15 Amendments
The Research Council may introduce amendments as set out in the contract.
Each of the parties may propose amendments to the contract. Amendments may apply to the project’s
objectives, scope, or other conditions
Amendments to the contract require the prior written consent of the Research Council.
16 Verification, auditing and disclosure requirement
The Research Council, the Office of the Auditor General or a third party appointed by the Research 
Council are entitled at any time to verify that the funds are being applied in accordance with the 
contract.
Upon a request from the Research Council or Office of the Auditor General, the Project Owner shall 
produce receipts, time sheets, calculations and any other relevant documentary evidence and 
information requested by the Research Council and/or the Office of the Auditor General in order to 
carry out such verification.
The Research Council and the Office of the Auditor General may require the Project Owner to 
disclose all information that is necessary to verify compliance with the rules pertaining to public 
support.
17 Repayment
Regardless of what follows from Section 4, the Research Council may demand repayment of the 
disbursed allocations, in whole or in part, in case of deviations from and/or breach of contract, 
including that the project has received other project funding than assumed at the time the contract 
was signed, or if the Research Council has disbursed funds that will constitute unlawful state aid.
12 / 14

18 Cancellation
18.1 The Research Council’s right of cancellation
The Research Council may cancel the contract in the event of a material breach on the part of the 
Project Owner.
Such a material breach includes among other things situations in which:
 there are significant deviations in relation to the progress plan or other factors
regulated in the contract;
 the Project Owner has not fulfilled its obligations relating to reporting and archiving,
including that the reporting provides an incorrect picture of the actual situation, cf. Sections 7
and 10, respectively;
 the disbursed funds have not been applied in accordance with the contract;
 research infrastructure has not been adequately insured and kept operational and in
good working order during the contract period, cf. Section 9.1;
 the Project Owner is engaged in activities which are not compatible with the current
legislation or with the Research Council’s objectives and guidelines;
 the Project Owner is unwilling or unable to complete the project.
The Research Council may furthermore cancel the contract in the event that:
 a person or undertaking outside the EEA assumes control of the Project Owner, and
the terms set out under Section 9.2, final clause are met;
 there is notification of a declaration of bankruptcy, or a petition for compulsory
winding up or the opening of composition proceedings on the part of the Project Owner, or
there is other compelling reason to believe that the Project Owner is insolvent;
 a decision has been taken to close down the Project Owner’s activities or there is
other compelling reason to believe that grounds exist for forced dissolution of the company;
 key prerequisites underlying the contractual relationship are not fulfilled, such as the
Research Council receives less funding than expected, or there are changes in public
regulations or other unforeseen circumstances arise that will have a major impact on the
implementation of the project or the Research Council’s ability to contribute to it, cf. Section
4.7.
18.2 Procedure for cancellation
The Project Owner is to be notified before the Research Council decides to cancel the contract.
Notification of cancellation shall be submitted in writing with specification of the reasons for 
cancellation.
18.3 Reimbursement claims in the event of termination
If the Research Council cancels the contract pursuant to Section 18.1, the Research Council may 
demand repayment of the disbursed allocations, in whole or in part, including interest on the amount 
from the date of the breach, in accordance with the Act relating to interest on overdue payments, etc. 
(LOV-1976-12-17-100).
The Project Owner is to be notified before the Research Council decides to claim reimbursement of 
allocations.
13 / 14

18.4 Transfer of rights to project results in the event of cancellation
In lieu of such reimbursement, the Research Council may demand transfer of the rights to project 
results. The claim for such transfer shall be submitted in writing, and the Project Owner shall 
surrender the rights without undue delay, and cover any costs in connection with the transfer. Upon 
surrender, the right of ownership will be passed from the Project Owner to the Research Council or 
to a relevant third party.
 
19 Duration and discharge of the contract
19.1 In general
The contract will enter into force from the date on which it has been signed by both parties and one 
copy along with any signed collaboration agreements have been received by the Research Council. 
The contract will be discharged without notice upon conclusion of the project and submission and 
approval of the final report. 
Discharge of the contract does not imply cessation of contract provisions that are not, by their nature,
limited to the contract period. This applies, for example, to the provisions pertaining to accounts, 
reports, the transfer of project results, publication, etc.
19.2 Termination of the contract by agreement
The parties may agree in writing to terminate the contract before the conclusion of the project period.
20 Choice of law/venue
This agreement is governed by and shall be interpreted in accordance with Norwegian law.
Any disputes shall be settled in the ordinary courts. Oslo District Court shall serve as the court of 
venue. In the event that the Project Owner is a public institution, disputes shall be submitted to the 
Ministry of Education and Research, which will decide how these shall be solved.
14 / 14

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
 
1 
National Center for Sustainable Subsurface Utilization  
of The Norwegian Continental Shelf (NCS2030) 
Relevance to the call 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 6th report1 emphasizes that the globe is warming, and 
rapid action is needed to mitigate climate change . In order to reach the Paris agreement target, the 
International Energy Agency (IEA), in its last report2, proposes a scenario where none of the new oil reserves 
will be developed. The Norwegian petroleum industry is preparing its future paths toward Net-Zero Emissions 
(NZE) by 2050, while continuing to supply the world with energy (Equinor 3). An energy mix, with the right 
combination of fossil and renewable energy sources, together with CO2 capture and storage (CCS) is a viable 
option. Norway is one of the most important providers of energy to Europe and has major opportunities to 
become a frontrunner in the sustainable energy transition to renewable energy and NZE hydrocarbon (HC) 
production. To transform the Norwegian Continental Shelf (NCS) into sustainable utilization, a new way of 
thinking across disciplines and societal acceptance are required. T herefore, it is important to integrate 
research, education, and innovation to build knowledge and develop technologies tow ards the optimal 
utilization of the NCS.   
 
The vision of the NCS2030 center  is to facilitate an energy -efficient, multi-purpose utilization of the NCS 
subsurface in the transition to a “ Sustainable Subsurface Value Chain”  (Figure 1). This includes both cost- 
and energy-efficient NZE oil and gas production, utilization of reservoirs for renewable energy production 
and storage of CO2 and other waste disposal in near field areas. Reutilization of existing infrastructure in an 
optimal manner (circular e conomy) and connection to other value chains, e.g. CO 2 transport and storage,  
Blue H2 produciton, offshore wind and geothermal energy, are paramount. This vision directly addresses the 
scope, priorities, and objectives of the Research Center for Petroleum call, and comply with the plan for the 
Petroleum research portfolio as specified by the Research Council of Norway (RCN)4. 
   
Figure 1 – NCS2030 to establish The Sustainable Subsurface Value Chain 
 
We consider four important research areas (Figure 1), namely i) Subsurface energy systems, ii) Net-zero 
emission production, iii) Digitalization and iv) Society, that integrate multi-disciplinary research activities for 
the Sustainable Subsurface Value Chain. In addition, Education of professionals with new competencies, and 
ensuring equality and gender balance are an important priority. NCS2030 will enable collaboration between 
policy makers, field operators, technology providers and academic groups. Furthermore, it will complement 
and benefit established research initiatives and network s to create new solutions  through a dedicated  
Innovation program. With this large network, NCS2030 will be a significant national and international arena 
for outreach to the scientific community, stakeholders, and society.  
 
1 Climate Change 2021 The Physical Science Basis, IPCC, 2021  
2 Net Zero by 2050, A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector, Flagship report — May 2021 IEA   
3 Equinor’s Energy Perspectives 2021 (www.equinor.com)  
4 Portfolio plan for Petroleum (https://www.forskningsradet.no/om-forskningsradet/portefoljer/petroleum/).

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
2 
Excellence 
1.1 Knowledge needs, objectives and state of the art 
Societal and industrial needs: Transitioning to a sustainable energy mix is required to comply with the 
Norwegian Government’s strategy and the Paris agreement , while contributing to the UN’s Sustainable 
Development Goals. There is an urgent need for integration of new knowledge and technology to ensure the 
transition to NZE energy production in the coming years and decades. The petroleum industry is the largest 
and most profitable Norwegian industry , with high technological competence that contributes to energy 
security and job creation . Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the petroleum industry, mostly CO 2, 
represent 25% of the total national emissions. Norway plans to continue production of its HC  resources to 
meet market demand and has ambitions to reduce its emissions by at least 40% by 2030 and achieve NZE by 
2050 (KonKraft 5). Small- size discoveries, declining production from mature fields, increasing water 
production, CO2-emissions taxation, volatile oil prices, policy changes and public perception, are some of the 
critical challenges facing the industry. This requires policy makers to set strategies based on qualified data  
and information from  science and research. Advanced technologies, highly skilled work forces and 
reutilization of existing infrastructure are the foundation for  generating new business opportunities to 
maintain the NCS’ competitive position and license to operate. 
S
cientific needs: The Norwegian petroleum industry and academia have developed advanced technologies 
and competence for HC exploration and production leading to some of the highest recovery rates (~46% for 
oil, and ~70% for gas) in the world and lowest GHG emission s (8 g/barrel). Norway also has extensive 
experience in decarbonisation of oil and gas production (e.g. Sleipner and Snøhvit CCS projects ; Ringrose, 
2020). Nevertheless, about 50% of the HC resources will be left behind with a large amount in poor quality 
reservoirs – the so called “Challenging Barrel ” (Norwegian Petroleum Directorate; NPD, 2020), which will 
require existing and new disruptive improved/enhanced oil recovery (IOR/EOR) methods. The development 
of other offshore energy resources is progressing, but still in its infancy. NZE HC  production, blue H 2, 
subsurface utilization for other energy resources (e.g. geothermal), as well as for storage of both energy (e.g. 
H2) and waste (e.g. CO 2) introduce s new challenges. Therefore, the competence should be expanded to 
manage resources and reservoir usage for future energy production and storage (Heinemann et al., 2018). In 
addition, mature or depleted fields and saline aquifers may be considered as potential storage sites for large 
quantities of CO 2 (Ringrose, 2020; Halland et al., 2014), making use of existing infrastructure (Eide et al., 
2019).  
T
he primary objective  of NCS2030 is  to fill knowledge gaps and provide solutions for maximizing value 
creation of subsurface resources to reach the Net-Zero Emissions goals on the NCS. This ambitious goal will 
be reached by following seven secondary objectives (SO, Table 1) that we believe are well aligned with the 
call, focusing on future sustainable subsurface utilization, which positions NCS2030 to meet the scientific, 
technological and societal needs. 
T
able 1. Secondary objectives, relevant research, work packages (WP) and deliverables 
Secondary objectives Research 
domains / WPs 
Main deliverables / 
Key Performance Indicator 
SO1 Build integrated near field subsurface holistic models for 
increasing reserve base and evaluating the potential of geological 
CO2 and H2 storage, and renewable energy production 
Subsurface 
energy systems: 
WPs 1-2-5 
Surface hub models, workflows, 
and methodologies; geological 
scenarios to reduce uncertainty 
SO2 Develop new IOR solutions for improved and accelerated HC 
production at low environmental footprint to help reach 50% 
emission reduction by 2030 
NZE production, 
Society: WPs 3-4-
5-6
Proposed new solutions with 
large increased reserve and 
reduced emissions by 50%. 
SO3 Develop data-driven and machine learning approaches to 
integrate  subsurface characterization, uncertainty quantification 
and management workflows for better decisions 
Digitalization:  
WPs 1-2-3-4-5 
New digitalization workflows 
with improved functionalities and 
computational efficiencies. 
SO4 Recommend field cases on the NCS with high potential for NZE 
production based on renewable energy and the Sustainable 
Subsurface Value Chain  
Subsurface 
energy systems: 
WPs 1-3-5-6 
At least 5 potential cases in 
collaboration with center’s 
industry partners. 
5 Konkraft Report 2021: The energy industry of tomorrow on the Norwegian Continental Shelf (https://www.norskoljeoggass.no/

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
3 
SO5 Strengthen the business climate, create awareness and establish 
acceptance of NCS2030 activities and NCS exploitation 
Society: WPs 1-2-
3-4-5-6
White papers to policy makers, 
society, stake holders. News 
articles in national media. 
SO6 Establish an innovation platform as catalyst for new technology 
development in collaboration with industrial players on the NCS. 
Innovation, 
collaboration: 
WP7 
10-15 innovation projects for
new technology development
and field implementation.
SO7 Attract and train the next generation of scientists and skilled 
professionals for the energy transition, together with user 
partners and disseminate results of high quality and impact 
Education, 
Outreach, All WPs 
27 PhDs/Postdocs, 40 master 
theses, workshops, conferences, 
> 200+ peer-reviewed 
publications
S
tate of the art 
Subsurface Energy Systems: Over the last years, research on the  interplay between tectonics and 
sedimentation in rift systems (Tillmans et al., 2021;  Zhong and Escalona, 2020 ), salt tectonics (Tvedt et al., 
2016; Rojo et al., 2020), pre -Jurassic petroleum systems (Ohm et al., 2012 -   PaBas consortium), and the 
subsurface geology of the high north (Birtchall et al., 2020 - ArCEX; Marin et al., 2019 - LoCRA) have 
contributed to highlight new petroleum exploration play concepts on the NCS. Recent discoveries are small, 
most of them near existing infrastructure and many plays are still poorly understood. Traditionally, 
exploration and exploitation of NCS reservoirs have been limited to HC production (Halland et al., 2014; Quirk 
and Archer, 2020; NPD, 2020). Therefore, a holistic resource evaluation of the subsurface as a comprehensive 
energy system, given its  large potential for renewable energy supply and storage, will add value, provide 
energy security, and contribute to achieving NZE. For example, non-traditional reservoirs such as salt caverns 
(Caglayan et al., 2020) for hydrogen storage and high -pressure high -temperature (HPHT) reservoirs for 
geothermal energy production (Cui et al., 2016) are key and should be further studied. 
T
oday’s development towards understanding the subsurface as an integrated complex multi -dimensional 
system is driven by digitalization  to maximize data utilization and extract more information . This new 
knowledge can be utilized not only for HC exploration and production, but also for CO 2 and H2 storage and 
geothermal energy extraction . However, there is still a lack of quantitative data- driven understanding of 
various key risk factors and proper integration of data for extening reservoir utilization, de-risking prospects, 
and properly analyzing seal integrity and reservoir storage capacity (Van Schaack and Tillmans, 2021). This 
may also increase the current pre -drill probability of success (10 -15%) of exploration wells in the NCS with 
less than half of the discoveries being commercial (NPD, 2020). The current understanding of hydrocarbon 
charging of the reservoirs is the main uncertainty, reflecting our limited capability in mapping the distribution 
of source rocks and fluid migration ( NPD, 2020). In this context, aquifer behaviour and connectivity play an 
important role and is  critical for storage  capacity of energy and waste. Improved understanding of the 
migration and distribution of fluids will open undiscovered potential in near -field areas not only for HC but 
also for other fluids and will improve well placement. 
Th
e energy mix scenario is based on clean H 2 production combined with large-scale CCS and underground 
H2 storage. Several pilots and small-scale industrial projects have substantially increased confidence in 
underground CO2 and H2 storage reliability. However, gigaton scale CO2 injection has not been implemented 
on the NCS, and many challenges remain , e.g. l arge injection rates could bring significant geomechanical 
effects (Elenius et al., 2018; Wangen et al., 2016). CO2 mixed from multiple sources raises a question of CO2 
quality and the effect of impurities on the reservoir flow and seal integrity. Existing reservoir simulation tools 
are struggling to provide reasonable predictions for CO2 flow (Räss et al., 2014; Verdon et al., 2013). Attempts 
have been made to history-match observations at the Sleipner field using conventional reservoir simulations. 
However, these have failed to capture the first-order observations, such as facile vertical flow of CO2 through 
low permeable shale layers, the formation of focused fluid flow channels  or chimneys, and rapid lateral 
spread underneath the seal rock (Boait et al., 2012). Furthermore, the underground capacity for H2 storage 
in salt caverns, and porous reservoirs such as saline aquifers  or depleted gas reservoirs is still in its infancy. 
Technical feasibility, efficiency, and safety of H2 storage are impacted by fluid-rock interactions meaning that 
a coupled hydro-chemo-mechanical approach is required to assess the short- and long-term impact of cyclical 
H2 injection. The effect of fluid -rock interactions on storage integrity or capacity is currently unknown and 
needs an interdisciplinary approach of experimental investigations, numerical simulations, geological

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
4 
characterization and assessment of operational procedures. On the other hand, the potential for geothermal 
energy is large in areas with low-temperature gradients, but there are currently few sites in operation globally 
(IGA, 2014). Latest advances in drilling technologies bring ne w opportunities for developing geothermal 
energy in Norway. However, these technologies are still under development, and further research is needed. 
N
ZE production: Many existing fields on the NCS are in decline and are producing at a high water-cut, which 
increases energy-demand, costs and emissions per barrel. EOR methods to improve reservoir sweep and to 
minimize water/gas-cut may have large potential to accelerate production and reduce energy requirements 
and emissions. Recent findings have established fundamental knowledge of the NCS reservoirs and their 
improved recovery potentials. IOR/EOR methods such as low salinity (Smart Water), alone or in combination 
with polymers, HC gas and CO2 miscible gas or water alternating gas (WAG) injection have been identified 
with high technical and economic potential (Smalley et al., 2020).  Comprehensive research, largely at the 
National IOR Center of Norway (NIORC)  and by its partners, forms a solid foundation for the future NZE 
production. These include understanding effects of pore fluid chemistry and temperature on wetting and 
geomechanical properties of reservoir rocks (Voake et al., 2019; Minde et al. 2018, Mamonov et al. 2019); 
improved oil- water mobility ratio by combining Smart Water and polymer (Piñerez et al., 2018) and by 
wettability alteration ( Lake et al.,  2014); CO2-WAG and CO2-foam for mobility control combined with CO 2 
storage (Alcorn et al., 2020; Rognmo et al., 2019); accelerated and incremental oil recovery from sandstone 
and carbonate reservoirs with Smart Water (Puntervold et al., 2015; Aghaeifar et al., 2018); carbonated water 
to improve water flooding performance while storing CO2 (Fjelde and Guo, 2019); reservoir monitoring with 
partitioning tracers (Silva et al., 2020); environmental risk assessment for EOR (Vora et al., 2021 ); CO2 EOR 
for tight reservoirs (Berawala et. al, 2020); modelling tool IORSim for EOR processes (Hiorth et al., 2017) ; 
better prediction of  IOR potential (Minde et  al., 2020); and Open Porous Media (OPM ) for reservoir 
management and decision making (Rasmussen, 2021).  
E
OR as a tertiary recovery method often requires additional equipment and chemicals that are energy - and 
cost-demanding, leading to added emissions. Methods that accelerate production and store CO2 at the same 
time (when used as injectant, or combined with late field life CO 2 storage), will be prioritized by NCS2030. 
Methods for accounting the reduced emissions and energy invested in the complete EOR life cycle must be 
developed (Metidji, 2021; Farajzadeh et al., 2021). Most earlier research has been conducted at nano - to 
core-scale and rely on models to predict field scale potential. Recent large-scale testing at NIORC (Åsen et al., 
2019; Stavland et al., 2020) and field testing for foam -based CO 2 i njection (Alcorn, et  al., 2020) have 
demonstrated the need for more large- and pilot-scale testing to upscale EOR methods for offshore fields.  
D
igitalization: Substantial amount of subsurface data on the NCS has been and is increasingly collected. Data 
acquisition, sharing and fast access have been important contributions to the success of the petroleum 
industry in Norway. Complex and large models for multiple scenarios ( here defined as distinct alternatives, 
which may contain many uncertain quantities, from political to model uncertainties ) and utilizing Big Data, 
digital twins and machne learning (ML) will require high performance computing. Improved input to models 
using conventional methods or assisted with ML require underlying data and training data sets from 
accessible and exchangeable sources. The industry is evolving fast with new solutions in clo ud computing 
technology and standardization such as the OSDU community6 for subsurface data sharing, DELFI7, etc. Large 
scale applied data science will shift from computing and analysis at a single site to the new paradigm of 
federated computing that transfer computation to data, rather than the opposite8. This technological 
revolution offers a great opportunity to improve the current modelling workflow s and computing 
performance. In addition, the new generation of communication technologies enabling automated federated 
data service for accessing multiple data so urces, sufficient computing power for handling of intensive 
computations for model development and testing with realistic field cases , is offering a major step towards 
data utilization and effectivization (Yue et al., 2021).  
6 Open Subsurface Data Universe: An Open Source standards-based, technology-agnostic data platform  https://osduforum.org/ 
7 Schlumberger’s Cognitive E&P Environment 
8 EU patents MySoMe, PCT/EP2018/050125; and TOTEM, PCT/EP2020/079649

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
 
5 
Reliable flow forecasts are instrumental for decision support in reservoir management. Ensemble-based data 
assimilation (DA) (Evensen, 2021; Chen and Oliver, 2017) has led to a paradigm shift in petroleum reservoir 
management through its ability to include uncertainty quantification in subsurface characterization and flow 
forecasts, and is now the industry standard in the petroleum sector. DA still has important methodological 
challenges to be resolved and has not been extensively applied to other subsurface flow problems, such as 
CO2 and H2 injection and storage. Most importantly, standard application of DA quantifies uncertainty for a 
given scenario (geological setting, petrophysical model, etc.) ; But i n reality, multiple scenarios are usually 
viable, posing both methodological (Höge et al., 2020) and significant computational (Sinsbeck et al., 2021) 
challenges. NCS2030 will extend current DA workflows to allow for multi- scenarios, better uncertainty 
quantification and to include CO2 and H2 storage. Appropriate multifidelity (MF) (Peherstorfer et al., 2018) 
and ML (Luo et al., 2021) proxy models will be developed and applied to resolve computational challenges as 
well as large simultaneous (e.g., seismic) datasets (Nezhadali et al., 2021). 
 
Society: Future sustainable subsurface solutions will require human and financial resources. The petroleum 
industry and Norway will have to compete for these resources against other sectors and countries. The broad 
business climate of the industry and country, the policies for reaching NZE goals, and societal acceptance are 
key to mobilizing the necessary resources. Therefore, critical aspects for research are risk analysis, the tax 
system, access to long-term financial capital, factor mobility across sectors and societal acceptance. Research 
shows that petroleum investments are sensitive to the business climate, which again is formed by political 
risk, institutions, and taxes, among other factors (Bohn and Deacon, 2000; Cust and Harding, 2020; Arezki et 
al., 2019). Research by Ahlvik and Harding (in progress) suggests that financial constraints for oil companies 
on the NCS already exist. These are only likely to be more severe going forward given the current sentiment 
towards the petroleum  sector in financial markets. More research is required to understand how climate -
aware investors and stricter environmental policies will affect investments in physical and human capital in 
the petroleum sector. Regarding mitigation policies, there has recently been an emerging interest for supply 
side-oriented measures, but the literature is still dominated by theoretical studies (e.g., Harstad, 2012) and 
simulations (e.g., Fæhn et al., 2017). There is a need for bringing in analysis of real-world data to understand 
the effects of such policies in practice.       
 
The Sustainable Subsurface Value Chain requires collaborative and cross -disciplinary research and 
technology development, and gives opportunities for new solutions by involving students, researchers, 
technology developers and end users. NCS2030 will expand knowledge and results from other established 
centers and projects (Table 2) that have built competence in subsurface, digitalization, decision-making, CO2 
value chain and sustainable offshore energy production. 
Table 2. Building bridges between established national research initiatives and NCS2030 
Centers/Initiatives Scope and field of research NCS2030 complementary research 
NIORC - The National IOR 
Centre of Norway - 
Petrosenter, 2012-2021, UiS 
Basic understanding of fluid flow in reservoirs, 
laboratory experimental studies, EOR and 
reservoir characterization on field scale  
Optimization of IOR methods at pore, core 
and field scale, rock and fluid interactions 
and modelling tools for field application 
ArCEX -  Arctic Petroleum 
Exploration - Petrosenter, 
2012-2021, UiT 
Contribute to the understanding of the geology 
and resource potential of the high north  
Learnings and methodologies on subsurface 
characterization will be implemented in 
NCS2030.  
Low Emission Center 
Petrosenter, 2019-2026, SINTEF 
Develop new technology and concepts for 
offshore energy systems and integration with 
renewable power production technologies 
Close cooperation on the storage part of the 
CCS value chain together with NCCS 
NCCS - Norwegian CCS 
Research Centre, FME, 2016-
2024, SINTEF 
Fast-track CCS by working closely with the 
industry on research that addresses major 
barriers in making CCS happen. 
Close cooperation on the storage part of the 
CCS value chain, with synergies in EOR 
methods and storage capacity 
BRU21 - Better Resource 
Utilization in the 21st century, 
cluster, 2018-,  NTNU 
Research program in digital and automation 
solutions for the petroleum industry  
Synergies within the area of digitalization 
and ML in reservoir characterization.  
SIRIUS  - Centre for scalable 
data access, SFI 2015 – 2023, 
UiO 
Addresses the scalable data access with 
interdisciplinary research leading digitalization 
in petroleum industry. 
Close collaboration on competence and 
knowledge transfer within digitalization 
methodology, knowledge, and information.

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
6 
DigiWells (2020 – 2028)  
Digital Well Center for Value 
Creation, NORCE 
Center for value creation, competitiveness and 
minimum environmental footprint within 
digital drilling and well-technology 
Synergies on well completion for IOR and 
CO2 storage, also well reporpusing for 
renewable energy production and storage. 
SWIPA - Centre for Well Plug & 
Abandonment, SFI, 2020 - , 
SINTEF 
Scientiﬁc understanding of permanent well 
barriers and improve the methods for well 
plugging.  
Synergies on knowledge and technology for 
well reporpusing and P&A for CO2 storage 
and energy production. 
COREC - Centre for Oil 
Recovery, industry research 
program, 2003-2021, NORCE
Increase oil recovery from tight chalk 
reservoirs, build competence and education as 
leading IOR center in an international network. 
Mutual benefit for technology 
implementation. 
CGER - Norwegian Centre for 
geothermal energy Research, 
cluster, 2009- , NORCE 
Build a platform for strengthening national 
cooperation in research and technology within 
geothermal energy 
Synergies in the area of geothermal 
characterization in sedimentary basins 
SUCCESS - Subsurface CO2 
storage, FME 2008-2017, 
NORCE (previous CMR) 
CO2 storage in the subsurface within storage 
performance, seal properties, injectivity, 
monitoring and risk for the environment. 
Synergies in the area of subsurface storage, 
seal capacity and monitoring, which can also 
be used for the hydrogen value chain 
Ongoing consortia: e.g SAFARI, 
PABAS; Syn-Rift Systems  
Subsurface understanding of various geological 
settings in the NCS led by NORCE, UiS, and UiB 
Learning and methodologies will be 
implemented in NCS2030 
Climate Futures, SFI 2020-
2028, NORCE  
Cross-sectoral center to co-develop better 
methods and practices for climate risk 
management. 
Synergies in developing forecast methods 
with uncertainty. Climate change predictions 
important for NCS2030 risk assessments. 
Release Wells initiative 2024, 
Norwegian Oil and Gas 
Association 
Release of around 700,000 sample database 
systematically photographed and analyzed 
using XRF 
Utilize the database using digitalization tools 
for improving subsurface understanding 
1
.2 Research questions and hypotheses, theoretical 
approach and methodology 
T
he main research areas of the Sustainable Subsurface 
Value Chain are organized in eight cross-disciplinary and 
interconnected work packages (WPs) . Researchers will 
focus on the scientific methodologies within each WP, 
and the results will be applied in other relevant WPs 
(Figure 2). Due to their technological nature, WP s 1-6 
are described in this section, whereas WP s 7- 8 are 
described in sections 2.2, 3.4 and 3.2.  
WP
1. Near Field Resource Evaluation 
The growth in energy demand combined with climate change requires the use of new, integrated strategies 
and multi-disciplinary methods for the long -term sustainable exploitation of subsurface energy resources 
and storage capacity to reach the NZE goals by 2050 (SO1, SO4, SO7). Specific targets of WP1 are:  
• Produce an integrated geological holistic model and workflows for a selection of nearby existing
infrastructure (hubs; ca 50km radius) to provide energy and storage opportunities.
• U
nlock yet-to-find reserves in mature, near-field areas and provide new energy opportunities to extend
the life of existing infrastructure.
• M
ap fluid migration pathways and model basin-scale fluid dynamics to identify locations of best
re
servoir facies, reduce failure in exploration drilling, and to reduce environmental impact caused by
leakage from storage sites.
Research questions:  
Q1.1 How can we maximize data usage for building an integrated model of near- field areas and build 
predictive models for reservoir quality and distribution?  
Q1.2 What is the most efficient strategy to identify HC or geothermal reserves, and identify storage sites for 
H2 and CO2 to extend the life of infrastructure for long-term sustainable energy production? 
Q1.3 How can we improve the understanding of fluid migration to increase the success of exploration, and 
reduce uncertainties and risks related to leakage when injecting wastewater, CO2 and H2? 
Task 1.1 | Reservoir and seal integrity for NZE energy production and storage  
A main activity  is to evaluate reservoirs for HC production and their potential for long-term storage of H 2, 
CO2 and wastewater. In addition, this task will categorize reservoir suitability as a source for geothermal 
Figure 2 – NCS2030 – Work packages and their relations

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
 
7 
energy (e.g. HPHT) . In the case of H 2, caverns in salt domes are  of interest. Detailed  characterization of 
reservoirs for H2, CO2 and geothermal energy will be performed in WP2. Another activity is to map the basin-
scale fluid connectivity from reservoirs to the surface through the overburden and to de-risk charge by 
correlating the geochemical signature of surface seeps to fluid sources at depth. Therefore, mapping and 
characterizing structural and stratigraphic traps, as well as carrier beds, faults, gas clouds and chimney 
structures in the overburden as potential migration pathways  will be performed . Processes controlling 
transport of fluids ( HC and brines) from reservoirs to the surface using numerical simulators will also be 
conducted. To achieve these goals, it is necessary to optimize the use of quantitative geophysical analyses  
(forward modelling, ensemble methods)  in combination with ML  (physics informed and B ig Data; WP5) to 
improve the search for yet -to-find resources and storage sites. The starting point is to revisit the near field 
database and integrate different techniques and experiences such as subsurface data interpretation, outcrop 
analogues, structural analyses, and forward modelling  for creating quantitative models  with various 
geological scenarios for reducing uncertainty.  
Task 1.2 | Source rocks and primary migration 
This task focuses on the fluid dynamics related to aquifer behaviour, petroleum generation and expulsion in 
the source rocks, followed by fluid migration to charge traps or leakage to the surface. This task proposes to 
map the distribution of source rock properties and estimate the quantity of petroleum in a petroleum-brine 
solution that is expelled from the source rocks, a mechanism that is often overlooked. This work involves the 
development and use of models  beyond Darcy flow and linear poroelasticity  by including the processes of 
primary migration and expulsion of HC and water on multiple length scales.  
 
WP2. Reservoir Utilization For Energy Transition  
Achieving the NZE target by 2050 requires further development  of CO2 sequestration sites and exploration 
of alternative energy, such as H 2 and heat. Therefore, developing methods and tools that can enhance the 
capacity of geological sites for s torage (CO2 and H2), and production of geothermal energy on the NCS is of 
importance (SO1, SO4, SO7). Specific targets of WP2 are:  
• Improve the reservoir energy production strategy with carbon capture and storage. 
• Describe and understand H2 storage and retrieval mechanisms in different geological formations. 
• Provide tracer monitoring, leakage remediation and mitigation strategies for waste and energy storage.  
• Model reactive flow transport in deformable porous rocks for reliable assessment of storage sites. 
• Investigate if HPHT reservoirs can be utilized as geothermal heat mining sites.  
Research questions:  
Q2.1 What is the reliability and capacity of CO2 and H2 storage sites on the NCS? 
Q2.2 How can HPHT gas and condensate reservoirs be converted for geothermal heat production in the NCS? 
Q2.3 What is the best strategy to prevent leakages during injection and long-term storage?  
Q2.4 What is the impact of reactive flow in deformable porous rocks on the performance and safety?   
Task 2.1 | CO2 Utilization and Storage Enhancement   
Reaching NZE requires the contribution of CCS technology. The capacity for CO2 utilization and storage must 
be increased from 1 Mt/year to Gt s/year. This task will evaluate the potential of CO 2 utilization combined 
with carbon storage in mature and depleted fields on the NCS  (improved sweep efficiency in WP3 ). 
Understanding fluid-rock interactions during CO 2/H2 injection to enhance storage  capacity will be 
investigated. Improved modelling of CO2 plume migration in porous media based on reactive flow transport 
will be performed. Finally, the task will develop strategies for optimized injection operation and remediation 
of geological formations with support from the modelling and DA tools developed in WP5 . This includes 
analysis of multiple scenarios (for modeling of CO 2 plume) and ML/MF based proxy modelling (for 
optimization of injection operation). 
Task 2.2 | Underground H2 Storage Site Reliability Improvement   
H2 is a key  energy source for the decarbonization of the industry. However, intermittency and seasonal 
availability of renewable sources often do not correspond with energy demands at different time s and 
locations, thus require a mid - to long-term storage solution . Fuel cell batte ries are not capable of storing 
significant amounts of energy. Therefore, the underground storage of H2 produced from renewable energy 
during times of over -production is one attractive option ( WP1). However, integrity and loss of H 2 in 
subsurface geological sites are still questionable. This task will evaluate the potential of H2 storage in salt

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
 
8 
caverns in the NCS based on geomechanical and geochemical properties (WP3, 4 ). Similarly, improved 
modelling of H2 migration in porous media based on reactive flow transport will be perform ed. It is also of 
interest to evaluate chemical processes for low-energy H2 storage and/or incremental capacity for it. Using 
the same modelling tools as in Task 2.1, we will propose methods for leakage  prevention, detection and 
mitigation to protect the environment. 
Task 2.3 | Geothermal Heat Mining from HPHT Reservoirs   
Geothermal energy is a promising replacement for fossil fuels and can contribute to overcome the drawbacks 
in supply, which is characteristic of other renewable resources. With the advance of new technology for heat 
extraction and energy conversion, even medium temperature sedimentary basins can be utilized as a heat 
source. However, heat extraction from these basins is not easy and many challenges such as fracture design, 
scale (salt and calcite) formation, induced seismicity and wastewater management need to be tackled for an 
efficient heat extraction strategy. The focus  of this task is to develop subsurface knowledge for converting 
HPHT gas reservoirs ( WP1) to geothermal heat extraction sites for electric ity generation . This includes  
characterizing natural heat-flow and evaluating heat exchange with the subsurface. 
 
WP3. NZE Production  
HC production is energy intensive and emits large amount s of CO2. There is an urgent need to develop 
concepts and implement new energy-efficient solutions to produce HC resources at the lowest possible 
emissions (SO2, SO4, SO6, SO7). Specific aims of WP3 are: 
• Develop IOR concepts for improved , accelerated, profitable and sustainable  HC production at low 
environmental footprint, to reach 50% emission reduction by 2030 and NZE by 2050.    
• Propose new sustainable field development strateg ies integrated with renewable energy sources 
offered by the upcoming green offshore industries. 
Research questions:  
Q3.1 How to improve production for both conventional and tight reservoirs using CO2, polymer, smart 
water, and mobility control foam to save energy and significantly reduce the overall CO2 emissions? 
Q3.2 What is the late life IOR potential combined with CO2 storage, and what is the optimal timing?   
Q3.3 How can smart wells and advanced stimulation technologies contribute to improved production, in 
combination with remaining oil saturation measurements using partitioning tracers near wellbore?  
Task 3.1 | Maximizing value creation on NCS  
Approximately half of the reserves on the NCS will be left in place by the end of field lifetime; with about half 
in tight reservoirs (< 1 mD for oil, < 0.1 mD for gas fields defined by NPD’s 2020). By implementing additional 
IOR/EOR methods beyond the current seawater and gas/WAG flooding, it is possible to increase production 
while simultaneously reducing the CO2 emissions per barrel. This task will further mature the most relevant 
methods for the NCS and prioritize methods such as smart water, green polymer and CO2 EOR combined with 
CO2 storage (SO2, WP2), and foam for CO2 mobility control. The whole value chain will be evaluated, both 
for its IOR potential as well as  its environmental footprint , emission reduction and energy saving. F or 
example, polymer IOR will include its production, transport, injection , back production, reinjection and 
discharge; or the time for stimulation and ‘slow’ HC production from tight reservoirs , combined with CO2 
storage at late field-life to maximize value creation. Partitioning tracers will be further evaluated for in-situ 
determination of remaining oil (SOR) and wettability, combined with deep well stimulation (Bjørnseth et al., 
2019), to directly q uantify IOR effects. Modelling tools must be improved to be able to handle  the whole 
value chain (scenarios in WP5). It is also important to improve input to the models (WP5) by including large 
scale lab data, information from time-lapse geophysical monitoring and new data from well fibre optics, etc.. 
Task 3.2 | Real field applications for NZE production   
Field production in the coming decades must comply with and support the NZE ambition. At the same time, 
it is our obligation to maximize value creation from existing fields and infrastructure. New methodology and 
processes will be developed to evaluate feasible IOR/EOR concepts according to the future regulatory 
frameworks, including reduced CO 2 emissions, saved taxation  and classification of HC  products. In this 
respect, best practice of the life cycle analysis (LCA) will be used to quantify the overall value creation and its 
implications (WP6). Forecasting emission reduction, saved cost  and energy for  existing and new 
infrastructure will be based on the DA workflows further developed in WP5.  
WP4. Efficient Water Management for NZE

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
9 
The amount of water injected, produced and discharged to sea in aging fields on the NCS is increasing. Water 
handling is energy-intensive and costly, thus efficient water management is crucial for field econom ics and 
effective management will help to protect the environment (SO2, SO5, SO6, SO7). Specific aims for WP4 are: 
• To investigate solutions for improved macroscopic sweep of reservoirs.
• To minimize injection water recirculation with reduced energy needs, thus reducing CO2 emissions.
Research questions:
Q
4.1 How can water production and recirculation be minimized by conformance control technologies?
Q4.2 How can produced water re-injection (PWRI) become an opportunity for improved recovery and can it
be combined with CO2 applications, such as CO2/WAG? 
Q4.3 How can tracers be used to measure reservoir thief zones for water-shutoff operations? 
Task 4.1 | Improved water-management for energy-efficient production  
Water conformance control methods for both near-well water shut-off and deep-reservoir water diversion 
for high water-cut wells will be designed for field implementation . Novel methods utilizing CO 2 (WP2) and 
produced water as injection fluids will be studied for its added value of emission reduction. Tracer techniques 
(WP3) for determining recirculated water volume and thief zone size  will be evaluated for real field data to 
optimize water shut- off operations . Subsurface challenges and opportunities related to in -well water 
separation and PWRI into another well interva l (e.g. thief zone blocking by oil-in-water emulsion; Alahmed 
et al., 2020 ) will be evaluated. In addition, i njected fluids, chemicals and particles may change rock 
mineralogical composition, wettability, permeability and geomechanical properties, which may be beneficial 
or detrimental for efficient reservoir drainage. Experimental and analytical methods will be used to improve 
the understanding of how the reservoir will respond to these effects in order to improve well treatment 
operations. Other techniques such as smart well completions  and advanced well stimulation will also be 
studied to accelerate oil production at lower water cut (WP3). 
Task 4.2 | Near-well modelling tools improvement 
Better near-well modelling tools are necessary to improve description of the complex chemical reactions and 
injectivity in near -well region s during injection, well stimulation and smart well completions . Simulation 
models, IORSim and OPM, both developed in NIORC, will be further extended to incorporate water and gas 
injection with blocking gel for conformance control , carbonated water,  CO2/WAG, tracers ( passive and 
partitioning, micro PITT tracer tests) , smart well completion s with ICD/AICD , and stimulation processes. 
These tools  are critical to design water management operations , estimate cost benefit and emission 
reduction (SO2), and will also reduce uncertainties in the moddels for the digitalization workflows (WP5).    
Task 4.3 | R eal field applications for no water discharge to sea 
Validation of real field applications is a critical step to guarantee successful deployment of solutions for water 
management. Proposed activities include to develop and demonstrate methods on field cases, including first 
verification on synthetic cases and benchmarking on available field cases, utilizing the digital tools of WP5.  
WP5. Digital Subsurface For Improved Decisions 
Large amounts of subsurface data are available , but current workflows and  programs for subsurface 
understanding are not optimal, resulting in in adequate utilization of datasets . To build a Sustainable 
Subsurface Value Chain and make more informed decisions, digitalization and ML are necessary to integrate 
the knowledge and competence building from different WPs (SO3, SO7). A digital infrastructure, Subsurface 
Knowledge Cloud (SKC), will be established to provide readily usable data and high-performance computing 
power and visualization tools. Specific targets of WP5 are:  
• More robust model forecasts with feasible computational cost and better accessibility of big datasets.
• More comprehensive and reliable uncertainty quantification for multi-purpose reservoir usage.
• Develop data -driven approaches to integrate ML into subsurf ace-characterization, uncertainty
quantification, and the decision-making process.
• Research questions:
Q5
.1 How can we effectively utilize all available data from available data sources across multiple sites?
Q5.2 How can we develop automated workflows allowing for more robust forecasts from subsurface models
with feasible computational cost? 
Q5.3 How can important uncertainties be accounted for quantifying uncertainties in model forecasts? 
Q5.4 How can ML extract relevant information for decision-making and quantifying data value?

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
 
10 
Task 5.1 | Data Assembly, Theory-guided Data science and Multi-fidelity Modeling 
Current ensemble -based subsurface -characterization and optimization workflows use computationally 
expensive physics-based simulators with large input data sets. With increasing model complexities, and with 
focus on reliable uncertainty quantification, there is a need for increased ensemble sizes to make the 
uncertainty quantification statistically more  robust. Therefore, this task will focus on developing 
computationally efficient physics -informed ML and MF models for subsurface-characterization and 
optimization workflows. Accurate ML methods require large data sets for training and validation. Many 
subsurface data sources are currently available, but without proper metadat a labelling and often with 
unknown quality, thus not ready to be applied. To access and use available data from multiple sources, this 
task will make tools for automated labelling, quality checking, stamping and preparation of available datasets 
for effective model input and  ML. This will potentially lead to automat ed workflows through the NCS2030 
digital platform SKC  based on the  computing power and UiS’ Data-centered and Secure Computing Cloud 
Hub, which is  also connected with cluster -nodes at the Green  Mountain data centers 
(https://greenmountain.no/). Existing data sources and external computing cent ers can  be managed by 
automated smart contracts agreed in the data federation with OSDU standard.  
Task 5.2 | Uncertainty quantification with multiple scenarios 
For realistic subsurface flow problems, multiple scenarios including geological setting and process modeling 
are usually viable. Unwarranted selection of a single scenario for further investigation can lead to large errors 
in flow forecasts that are not reflected when the corresponding uncertainty is quantified. For realistic 
uncertainty quantification, it is therefore required that the workflow takes multiple scenarios   into account 
in a statistically correct manner. Published methodologies with this aim typically rely on calculation of the 
Bayesian model evidence (BME), which is computationally challenging for realistic reservoir model sizes. This 
task will develop methods for multiple scenarios  uncertainty quantification and utilize ML- and MF-enhanced 
reservoir flow simulations (task 5.1) for calculation of BME, at realistic reservoir model sizes. 
Task 5.3 | Improved workflow for decision making 
To increase the potential of data science, subsurface characterization through DA, uncertainty quantification, 
and the decision-making process must be aligned. Therefore, the use of hybrid ML and ensemble-based DA 
algorithms for improved reservoir management will be implemented. In addition, ML for unbiased 
uncertainty quantification, decision support, and multi -objective decision-making including the assessment 
of value-of information and value -of-flexibility will be used. Finally, this task will work on development of 
new methods for dimensionality reduction to handle complex models and big datasets. 
 
WP6. Energy Policy, Economy and Society   
The role of the NCS in the future energy system depends on the national and international business 
regulations, societal acceptance and licence to operate. The targets of WP6 are to (SO4, SO5, SO7):  
• Address the competitiveness of the NCS in national and international contexts. 
• Contribute to sound climate mitigation policies. 
• Understand and explain the risk and uncertainty of investments related to WP1-WP5 
Research questions:  
Q6.1 Does the Norwegian tax and subsidy system ensure the right balance between investment in profitable 
projects and allowing the petroleum sector as a vehicle for green industries vs avoiding stranded assets 
and expensive pilot projects?  
Q6.2 What are the viable measures to curb emissions in the NCS, e.g., production taxes and electrification?  
Q6.3 What are the effects of increasing risk premiums, political scrutiny and competition in the petroleum 
sector and how to improve handling and communication of uncertainty in businesses and 
policymaking? 
Task 6.1 | Business climate  
This task will investigate the role of the b usiness climate (e.g., licenses, taxes, infrastructure, and human 
capital) for the operations on the NCS as described in WP1 -4. We will evaluate how the state and the 
petroleum sector are to balance investing in profitable projects and avoiding stranded assets and expensive 
failures to gain public support. One of the issues to consider is to identify the increasing discrepancies in the 
interests of the petroleum  sector, the state and society, and the high stakes in petroleum  extraction, and 
climate mitigation. The market may also have decreasing appetite on HC investments, resulting in increasing

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
 
11 
risk premiums and fiercer competition in attracting investments. Simultaneously, we will investigate how the 
complementarities between petroleum and new technologies such as CCS and H2, can facilitate the transition 
towards the new energy system. The NCS is  in a particularly strong position for taking advantage of these 
complementarities, but we need to make sure that the business climate is prepared for laying the ground for 
a successful symbiosis. NCS2030 sees the petroleum sector as the vehicle towards ne w technologies, but 
regulatory tools and policies need to be in place for the business climate to adapt seamlessly.    
Task 6.2 | Emissions 
Supply side policy induced reductions of exploration and production can increase oil prices and reduce CO 2 
emissions. There is an emerging interest in this internationally and several countries have implemented such 
measures. However, given the possibility that other countries can replace production cuts on the NCS, 
international coordination is likely to be key to making supply side policies effective and to limit the costs of 
such emission reductions. By using observed variations in actual supply side restrictions across countries, 
such as production taxes or bans on licencing, and associated investments and production data, this task will 
bring knowledge on the costs and benefits of cutting emissions through supply side restrictions.  
Task 6.3 | Acceptance evaluation 
This task  will employ and develop risk prin ciples and methods for evaluating the quality of subsurface 
solutions, including the use of multi-criteria decision-making approaches and prioritization of measures. The 
increasing scrutiny facing oil producers in politics, in the legal system and in finan cial markets contribute to 
a less predictable business climate. How to communicate risk and uncertainty will further be an important 
part of this task. 
 
1.3 Novelty and ambition 
Transitioning the NCS into the future S ustainable Subsurface Value Chain requires a new way of thinking 
across disciplines and also integration of new offshore industries. The transition time is short; therefore, it is 
crucial to integrate research, education, collaboration and innovation in order to transfer research results 
into timely applications. Core and critical elements for achieving a sustainable NCS future are defined by the 
NCS2030. The f ocus is on the  long-term multi-purpose utilization of the NCS subsurface, including both 
energy-efficient HC production and the transition to renewable energy resources by utilizing the reservoirs 
for heat extraction and energy and waste storage. NCS2030 will provide the fundamentals and the framework 
to transform the NCS into a sustainable energy  provider, ensuring energy security and contributing to 
reaching NZE, and if possible, negative emissions. The main ambitions are classified in the following areas: 
 
Subsurface energy systems: Sustainable development of the NCS requires a more inclusive and dynamic 
multiphase flow migration model that can be applied not only to explore oil and gas, but also to characterize 
the geological storage sites for other types of utilization. This model will be applicable for the exploration of 
oil and gas, storage of CO2 and H2, and production of geothermal energy. In parallel, a portfolio of plays near 
infrastructure for multipurpose utilization within the sustainable subsurface value chain builds the basis for 
new business opportunities and increases the competitiveness of the NCS in the future . In addition to the 
ongoing efforts toward commercial CO 2 storage in the subsurface (e.g. N orthern lights) , H2 storage and 
geothermal heat are areas where cutting edge research and rapid implementation are necessary. Subsurface 
knowledge for blue and green H2 production and storage of GHG for energy security during unstable supply 
of other renewable energy sources on the surface is a main keystone. Geothermal energy is among the most 
climate friendly and renewable sources of energy. The understanding of its potential in sedimentary basins 
will contribute to power generation for field operations.  We expect to develop fundamental knowledge 
about rock-fluid interactions and fluid flow processes during CO2 and H2 storage using laboratory experiments 
and mathematical models. We will evaluate the role of impurities and fluid chemistry on trapping 
mechanisms, storage capacity, injectivity, leakage risk, and sweep efficiency.  
 
NZE production: On the NCS  it is critical that CO 2 emissions are significantly reduced  and HC are energy-
efficiently produced at lower water -cut. Many EOR  methods are  environmentally unfriendly and energy 
intensive, thus methods that improve reservoir sweep, accelerate oil production and reduce water handling 
(both for injection and discharge) will be developed  for achieving NZE. Possibilities of combining  Smart 
Water/Low salinity water with low concentration polymers will be further investigated. Utilization of CO2 in

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
 
12 
oil recovery processes will be studied, and innovative experimental methods will be used to expand existing 
knowledge of CO 2 foam flow in po rous media. A particular focus will be to establish a link between new 
observations at the pore - and core -scale to field -scale displacement mechanisms. Efforts will target 
implications for co-optimizing CO2 EOR and CO2 storage when using CO2 foams for mobility control. Methods 
with focus on energy-efficiency and new promising chemicals for water shut-off such as thermo-associative 
polymers (TAP) will be developed . This fundamental research will lead to improved  understanding of the 
mechanisms involved in better HC recovery with less water. The generated results will supply input data in 
simulation models for decreasing the  modelling uncertainty. New tracer deployment methods for 
determining in-situ wettability and SOR will be developed. For evaluating the success of applying a method, 
existing in -house modelling tools will be further improved to handle n ear-well geochemical and physical 
processes. 
 
Digitalization: Digitalization and ML are becoming the processes and tools that can lead the transformation 
into an efficient and sustainable industry. MF modeling is a rapidly growing area in many science disciplines, 
but it has not been exten sively applied for subsurface. Since porous -media properties vary with fluid types 
and scales, and while it is unclear how these will influence modelling results, porous -media flow for multi -
purpose reservoir usage seems a natural habitat for MF modeling. We expect developments of new 
theoretical and methodological advancements within MF modeling for application to reservoir modeling. 
Multi-scenario uncertainty quantification for large-scale reservoir models is a daunting computational task, 
and it will not  be possible without significant scientific progress regarding computation of the BME. 
Development of techniques and workflows that permit constructive predictive and quantitative models with 
integrated data sources of analogues and large subsurface datase ts, assisted with ML and fast forward 
models, will be a continuous process with arising target towards the sustainable transition. The data and tool 
accessibility barrier will be removed by the planned SKC which can be effectively used as a testbed, and as 
an innovation and education platform for modelling and ML tools.   
 
Society: After 50 years of successful operations, the NCS  is experiencing mixed signals from policy makers 
and society. The markets are in the short run positive, with a rising oil price at the wake of the pandemic and 
a likely investment deficit globally to replace declining supply. In the longer run, climate m itigation actions 
are likely to reduce demand and hence the price for oil and gas. This is likely to increase the competition for 
investments in oil and gas. Many countries may be able to compete with the NCS in terms of production costs 
and may have large  potential for stimulating their oil sectors by reducing investment -distorting taxes. The 
project will investigate the role of the  business climate for the continued operations on the NCS. The project 
will lead to tangible results on economic costs and benefits as well as on risk analysis. In turn, these will help 
policy makers and the sector with balancing the challenge investing in profitable projects, avoiding stranded 
assets and contributing to lower GHG emissions. 
 
2 Impact 
2.1 Potential impact of the proposed research  
NCS2030 contributes to several UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) including SDG 7 (affordable and 
clean energy) by building new competence and research solutions  for the S ustainable Subsurface Value 
Chain, SDG 13  (climate action) by providing solutions for a NZE society by  2050; SDG 4  (education) by 
educating the new generation of professionals for the energy transition; and also SDG 8 (decent work and 
economic growth); SDG 9 (industry, innovation, and infrastructure) by building competence for new business 
opportunities; SDG 12 (responsible consumption and production) by providing solutions for low -emission 
and effective utilization of the subsurface; SDG 14 (Life below water) by safe subsurface storage of CO2/H2 
and reduced water discharge to sea; and SDG 5 (gender equality) by setting the ambitious goal that at least 
40% of center staff will be female. 
 
Nationally, NCS2030 will play an important role as the national subsurface competence center in educating 
a new generation workforce for the transformation of the NCS into the Sustainable Subsurface Value Chain 
to achieve the Norwegian national emission reduction goals . This transformation will require new 
technologies and solutions as well as competences and skilled human resources. The proposed research

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
 
13 
topics in NCS2030 will address this broad need while ensuring energy security and contributing to building 
new industries. Internationally, NCS2030 will promote Norway as an attractive technology and knowledge 
provider worldwide for the sustainable offshore energy sector and will reinforce Norway’s leadership in 
sustainability. 
 
Advances in science and technology within NCS2030 will have its greatest impact on the energy industry by 
facilitating its green transition and supply ing skilled professionals. The results and deliverables  include a 
holistic understanding and utilization of  subsurface, next-generation modelling tools and methodolog ies, 
solutions with new technologies or by integrating state-of-the art technologies, and well-trained research 
and work forces. More specifically, we will develop new and improved knowledge of geological plays for both 
new HC resources and for renewable energy  combined with CO 2/H2 storage. We will recommend more 
energy-effective HC production solutions with minimized carbon footprint by integrating renewable energy 
sources and a CCS value chain. We will develop effective digitalization tools and methods for subsurface 
characterization with multiple scenarios, quantification of uncertainties for better decision, extend the 
experience of ensemble-based workflows for emission reduction, energy efficiency, utilization of reservoirs 
for storage of energy and waste, and effective use of multiple data sources to improve interoperability. The 
new tools and methods will lead to better decisions, increased value  creation, reduced risk and improved 
safety. Furthermore, the research results will also guide the role of policy, regulatory framework, and support 
energy companies, investors and decision makers in assessing risks and profitability for the future NCS. 
  
The planned I nnovation Program will form  a platform for the industrial partners to quickly adopt new 
technologies and methods to their operations and develop new services and products both for the NCS and 
for export. This will contribute to value creation for the companies in the transition period and contribute to 
economic growth, job security and social welfare.  
 
The impact for academia  includes the opportunity of conducting high-level industry-relevant research of 
benefit for the industry and  society, and to directly contribute to the transformation of the NCS toward a 
Sustainable Subsurface Value Chain. Research dissemination of the PhDs ’, Postdocs’ and master students ’ 
work using open access channels an d international conferences will attract more students to  study 
subsurface topics. Additionally, it will encourage closer collaboration with the existing academic programs 
and current development of continued education for professionals at the Department of Energy Resources 
at UiS within the fields of digitalization and energy transition of the subsurface.  A plan for t he young 
researchers and students to work in close collaboration with experts from the industrial partners will be 
established (e.g., company placement). PhD and Postdocs will have access to The Petroleum Research School 
of Norway (NFIP; https://nfip.no/) where relevant courses and workshops will be implemented. High quality 
publications will increase the chance for Norway to attract funding from international programs such as EU 
Horizon 2020 (Societal Challenges) and Horizon Europe (Climate, Energy and Mobility). 
 
2.2 Measures for communication and exploitation (WP7) 
An active webpage and data portal will be established  as the Center starts .To impact and reach out  to the 
scientific community, NCS2030 scientific results will be published in  open access, high-impact science and 
technology journals , and in journals for other sectors for cross -pollination. We anticipate publishing a 
minimum of 150 high-impact papers in scientific peer-reviewed journals during the eight-year lifetime of the 
Center, as well as 20-30 conference presentations per year to disseminate research results. At the same time, 
the petroleum industry needs skilled human resources for many years to come, but there is a lack of interest 
for studying subjects related to petroleum which will lead to lack of competence in the long-term. Therefore, 
we will work together with  stakeholders, such as the  Norwegian Oil and Gas Association 
(https://www.norskoljeoggass.no/en/) to communicate the national importance and career opportunities by 
providing seminars to young people at secondary and high schools, s ocial media, and newspapers. We will 
use our research to change the negative public perception of petroleum production. Therefore, NCS2030 will 
offer an opportunity to the next generation of professionals to transform the energy industry. A main 
dissemination arena is the annual Energy Norway Conference (ENC) (to replace the IOR Norway Conference 
2015-2021) as the meeting p lace for subsurface  professionals in Norway and international communities,

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
 
14 
policy makers, regulatory bodies and students. The NFIP is another instrument to divulgate competence via 
courses, workshops and summer schools. Furthermore, close collaboration between researchers, students 
and industry partners will be prioritized through frequent workshops to exchange research results 
 
NCS2030 will act as a catalyst to expand project activities to EU initiative s and will collaborate with other 
research and innovation centers (Table 1).  The goal is to fill knowledge gaps for complete solutions for the 
sustainable transformation of the energy sector. An additional way to facilitate fast-track innovation of the 
research results from the Center is through the planned Innovation Program under the NCS2030 umbrella. 
This will contribute to accelerate implementation of new solutions to meet the NZE goals. An Innovation 
committee (described in 3.2), assisted by the Technology Transfer Office (TTO) (Validé, https://valide.no/), 
will continuously scout and create new projects  for innovative solutions ( SO6). The Center’s consortium 
agreement will manage the use of the research results and intellectual property rights (IPR) . A s eparate 
agreement between the Innovation Program and Center’s sponsors will regulate the background IPR.  
 
Data Management Strategy (DMS) will be largely based on planned SKC (WP5) making the Center’s output 
findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable (FAIR). The practicial DMS will be implemented according to 
the main partners’ data management practice in line with the research data management requirements.  
 
3 Implementation 
NCS2030 consists of four main academic and research partners with cutting edge competence in subsurface 
understanding, petroleum and energy resource s: University of Stavanger ( UiS; Center host), NORCE 
Norwegian Research Centre AS  (NORCE), Institute for Energy Technology ( IFE), and University of Bergen 
(UiB). In addition, The University of Tromsø (UiT), Department of Geosciences will be an associated academic 
collaborator providing knowledge and PhD co-supervision in WPs 1, 2 and 6. University of Oslo (UiO) will be 
involved in WP5 through SIRUIS, and potentially in WP1,2 for PhD co-supervision. The partners have been 
collaborating in NIORC (2013-2021) with joint research activities and educating more than 40 PhD/postdoc 
candidates and also participating in other research centers and larger research projects. NCS2030 will benefit 
from this collaborative foundation by building on expertise and networks to achieve the Center’s goals.   
3.1 Center director and project group  
Center Director: The Center’s director, Professor Alejandro Escalona is currently Head of the Department of 
Energy Resources at the University of Stavanger (UiS) until May 2022. Prof. Escalona has more than 25 years 
of both industry and academic experience, where he, for the last 16 years, has been leading industry projects 
with focus on the subsurface, together with academic and research institutions  both nationally and 
internationally, with participation of more than 30 industry partners, and total budget over 100MNOK. 
  
Management team and allocated resources: The Assistant Center Director is Ying Guo, PhD, Special Advisor 
and Senior Business developer at NORCE, and since 2019 Director of NIORC . She has 30+ years’ experience 
within both research, software development (DISKOS), and work experience in an oil and gas company as 
well as extensive research project management experience. Christian Dye, Cand. Scient. is Research Director 
for Environmental Technology at IFE and will be appointed as Research and Innovation Director. Associate 
professor Dora Marin at the D epartment of Energy Resources at UiS will be appointed as the  Academic 
Director. UiS-employed Administrative and Communication Coordinators will assist the Center 
Management with resource planning, supporting outreach and communication as well as PhD /PostDoc 
students. The Center Director and Assistant Director will fill ca. one full position, whereas the rest of the 
management will be covered by ca. one full-time position, in addition to administrative support from UiS.  
 
UiS has a long track -record and worldwide recognition in both education and research in the field of  
petroleum engineering and has been fundamental for the development of the petroleum industry in Norway 
and the Stavanger region with management of large industry- and RCN-sponsored projects. A major strength 
of UiS is the multidisciplinary integration between geosciences, reservoir engineering, reservoir chemistry, 
EOR/IOR, modelling and decision making, together with computer science, economy, risk analysis and social 
sciences. UiS is also well-equipped with experimental laboratories and digital infrastructure . NCS2030 is 
aligned with the university’s 10 -year strategy focusing on the transition to green energy.  The specific

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
15 
competence available at the Department of Energy Resources  within subsurface together with the 
Department of S afety, Economic  and Planning, the Business  S chool and the Department of Electr ical 
Engineering and Computer Science  fits with the skills needed for NCS2030. All researche rs have excellent  
publication records and impact within the key areas of expertise for the Center’s activities.  
NORCE is one of Norway's largest independent and multidisciplinary research institutes. NCS2030 goals are 
well aligned with the NORCE strategy within Sustainable Energy Production.  NORCE has long and broad 
experience in hosting large and complex research center s and has a large portfolio of CCUS and hydrogen 
related projects funded by national  and EU research programs . Relevant groups of highly competent 
researchers in subsurface digitalization, computational geosciences, computational modelling, geochemistry, 
geomechanics, well completion and P&A, IOR, CO2 leakage monitoring and risk mitigation, etc. will be directly 
involved in NCS2030. NORCE competence in environmental, climate and social science will assist the 
NCS2030 research. 
I
FE has since 1948 been a frontrunner in international energy research. IFE contributes to new solutions in 
renewable energy and petroleum industry, more energy -efficient industrial processes, zero -emission 
transport solutions and future -oriented energy systems . IFE has  extensive infrastructure and full- scale 
laboratories where theoretical models are transformed into commercial activities. Relevant competence of 
IFE in NCS2030 is advanced reservoir technology which includes laboratories for tracer technology and fluid 
migration studies, research groups working with basin modelling, simulation, multiphase modelling (e.g. 
Olga) and artificial intelligence. 
Ui
B and the Department of Physics and Technology has a record of producing high-quality research related 
to NCS2030. The Reservoir Physics Group has developed technologies for mitigating climate change and 
securing energy supply. Research focuses on multiphase flow in heterogeneous and fractured reservoirs, 
hydrate technology, in-situ fluid saturation imaging, integrated EOR (IEOR), CCUS, CO2 EOR and CO2 storage, 
and foam in CO2 mobility control.   
Wo
rkplan: Eight work packages (WPs) with defined tasks will be used to manage the research activities. WP 
leaders have been selected based on their research and management skills. Specific targets, short and long-
term goals and milestones within each WP are shown in Table 3. These will be defined in more detail jointly 
with stakeholders throughout the management governance. 
T
able 3. Work Packages, leaders, research partners and milestones. All WPs start in 2022 and end in 2029. 
Work Packages /Tasks 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 
WP1 - Near Field resource evaluation (Lead: IFE – S. Polteau; UiS – D. Marin; NORCE – T. Bhakta) 
Task 1.1 - Reservoir and seal integrity for net-zero energy M 1a   M1a,b   M1b   M1b  M1d M1d  
Task 1.2 - Source rocks and primary migration  M1c M1c 
WP2 - Reservoir utilization for energy transition  (Lead: IFE – V. Yarushina; UiS – R. Gholami; NORCE – I. Fjelde; UiB – Z. Alcorn) 
Task 2.1 - CO2 utilization and storage enhancement    M2a  M2a 
Task 2.2 - Underground hydrogen storage site reliability improvement   M 2b M2b  M 2c M2c 
Task 2.3 - Geothermal heat mining from HPHT reservoirs  M2d  M2d M2d 
WP3 – Net Zero Emission (NZE) production (Lead: UiS - Tina Puntervold; NORCE – S. Åsen; IFE – S. Viig; UiB – A. Graue) 
Task 3.1 - Maximizing value creation on NCS  M3a  M3b  M3a,b  M3a,b  M3a,b 
Task 3.2 - Real field applications  M 3c  M 3c M3c M3c  
WP4 - Efficient water management for NZE (Lead: NORCE- Randi Valestrand; UiS – P. Andersen; IFE-S. Hassfjell) 
Task 4.1 - Improved water-management for energy-efficient prod.  M4a  M 4a 
Task 4.2 - Near-well modelling tools  M4c  M4b  M4b 
Task 4.3 - Real field applications for no water discharge to sea  M 4d  M4d 
WP5 - Digital subsurface for improved decisions (Lead: NORCE Geir Evensen; UiS – C. Rong; IFE – T. Nordlander) 
Task 5.1 – Data Assembly, Theory-guided Data science & MF Modelling  M 5a  M5a, b M5b, c 
Task 5.2 - Uncertainty quantification with multiple viable scenarios  M5e  M5e 
Task 5.3 - Improved workflow for decision analysis M 5d   M5d  M 5d 
WP6 - Energy policy, economy and society (Lead: UiS – Torfinn Harding; NORCE – A. Blomgren; IFE – K.T. Espegren) 
Task 6.1 - Business climate on NCS  M 6a M 6a 
Task 6.2 - Emissions  M6b  M6b

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
16 
Task 6.3 - Acceptance evaluation  M6c  M6c 
WP7 – Education and Outreach (Lead: UiS – Dora Marin; Participants: NORCE, IFE, UiB)
Annual Energy Norway conference (ENC) 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
N° of PhD / PostDoc (start) - 21 candidates in total 3/0 4/1 2/1 2/3 3/0 2/0 3/0 0 
N° of innovation (spin-off projects) 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 
N° of Scientific workshops 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 
N° of Scientific publications 10 10 10 20 20 25 25 30 
WP8 - Management and reporting (Lead: UiS – Alejandro Escalona; Participants: NORCE, IFE, UiB) 
Management and communication M8a,b M8c M8d 
Reporting (annual and bi-annual reports) 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
M1a Methodologies for quantitative prediction of reservoir established. M1b Mapped and updates of the Reservoir potential 
and integrity for HC, CO2, H2 and waster in near field areas;  M1c Established models for primary migration and expulsion of 
HC and water, and connectivity into the reservoirs; M1d Categorization of suitability reservoirs as a source for geothermal 
energy; M2a Solutions for combine CO 2 EOR with Carbon Storage. M2b  Identified and updates of  the most important 
parameters to enhance storage capacity of CO 2 and H 2; M2c Modelling tools for CO 2 and H2 plume migration based and 
monitoring input; M2d Potential of geothermal energy in the NCS estimated. M3a EOR methods with low emission potential 
proposed; M3b IOR Solutions for tight reservoirs proposed  for new innovation projects; M3c Improved near-well modelling 
capabilities ready for use; M4a Water conformance control method cases recommended for field implementation; M4b Near-
well modelling tools; M4c IORSim upgrade including chemical reactions- M4d Field methods demonstration and suitable field 
cases identified. M5a Subsurface Knowledge Clou d up and running;  M5b Methodologies for MF uncertainty quantification 
integrated workflow ready; M5c ML proxy models tested;  M5d Hybrid ML -Ensemble methods for improved reservoir 
management showcase ready;  M5e ML/MF calculation of BME;  M6a Impact of the NCS2030 solutions into the business 
climate analysed; M6b: Achieved understanding of the policy impact of emissions; M6c Criteria for supporting policy makers 
established. M8a: NCS2030 start , all contracts in place , k ick-off workshop;  M8b NCS2030 website up and running; M8c  
Midway evaluation by RCN, M8d Final center ending event. 
3.2 Organization and management structure (WP8) 
The management structure ( Figure 3) facilitates the industry's 
active involvement and is fundamental for the Center's success. The 
Center Management (CM) will be responsible for the daily research 
activities and will coordinate across WP s in regard to education, 
industry contacts, innovation and outreach. The General Assembly 
consists of representatives from all research and industry partners 
and elects the Board . RCN and other stakeholders will have 
observer status. The  Board provides overall directions  and goals, 
and monitors operations according to the Consortium Agreement. 
For effective collaboration and dissemination,  a Technical 
Committee (TC) will consist of representatives from the industrial 
partners to follow research activities  and give technical input  to 
ensure its relevance. The WP leaders  will be responsible for 
scientific research and deliverables. Researchers, students and user 
partners will work closely through frequent meetings and seminars. 
Task Forces (TF) will be established on  an as-needed basis and consist of technical experts and users from 
industry and researchers across WPs. TF will collaborate with the Innovation Program to create new spin-off 
projects. Further, a Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) will consist of  international experts to provide 
advice and ensure scientific quality at the international level. The Board, TC, TF and SAC will work closely with 
CM according to the Center’s governance.  
A
n Innovation committee (proposed to be lead by industry) will be established by CM with the purpose of 
identifying and foster innovative solutions from the Center’s research results. The Innovation committee will 
work closely with CM, WP leaders, Board and TC with its TFs to monitor research results, by investigating 
further potential for field demonstration, implementation or commercial products. This activity will be part 
of the NCS2030 Innovation Program outside of the NCS2030 scope.  A PhD/Postdoc representative will be 
invited to be part of the committee. The goal of the Innovation Program is to establish dedicated projects 
and processes for technology development, demonstration, or commercialisation with separate private or 
public funding to accelerate implementation.  
Figure 3 - The management structure

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
 
17 
User partners represent petroleum companies on the NCS and technology providers, all in the transition to 
sustainable energy companies and many  involved in CCS. They will contribute to the Center  via Board, TC, 
Task Forces and Innovation committee making critical decisions, defining challenges and research goals, 
providing field cases and critical datasets, exchanging information, participating in Center workshops, hosting 
and co-supervising students and PhD/Postdocs and facilitating the Innovation Program. At the same time, 
they will benefit from the Center by exchanging competence and knowledge. Large service companies such 
as Schlumberger and Halliburton will actively participate in the Center’s research and innovation activities 
with their know-how, digital infrastructure and technology. More details are provided in their letters of 
intent. 
 
Research infrastructure:  The research partners together possess  necessary research infrastructure . This 
includes laboratories of top national ranking,  from the microscopic- to core-scale for studies on chemical- 
CO2-EOR, CCUS, geomechanics, large-scale porous flow at  realistic reservoir temperatures, pressures and  
flow rates. In addition, the Center ’s capabilities include unique and world -leading corrosion laboratory for 
CO2 and H2, tracer laboratories to test and prepare tracers for field operations  and laboratories for Special 
Core Analysis (SCAL). The partners also operate, jointly or separately, national infrastructure such as the 
Ullrigg well center, and the P&A  Lab for new technology testing and qualification . The partners have the 
necessary computer capacity to handle large subsurface data sets and models  to perform advanced 
modelling and simulations, including in-house developed tools, own computing clusters and cluster-nodes at 
Green Mountain. In addition, NCS2030 will benefit from other national research infrastructures such as the 
CO2-lab In Svalbard  and Breivik and UNINETT/Sigma2 for supercomputing. We will also identify  advanced 
equipment and computing power/data sources from our international academic and industrial and partners, 
e.g. wide ranges of micro CT rock scanners at partners site s for special studies , data storage, tools from 
DISKOS and other relevant data sources from industrial partners and technology providers.  
 
Risks: The identified main risks, their likelihood of occurrence and mitigations are summarized in Table 4. 
Table 4. Main risk assessment and mitigations 
 Likelihood  Measure for mitigation Continuous risk analysis 
The public/society 
acceptance for petroleum 
industry 
Medium 
to high 
Outreach activities (WP7) promoting the 
importance of the subsurface and petroleum 
competence for the energy transition 
Monitoring the perception of the 
public via newspapers and other 
media 
Change of policy, market, 
regulatory framework 
Medium 
to high 
 Discuss with RCN, academic and industry 
partners and collaborators alternative activities 
Periodically revise policies and 
regulatory framework 
Difficult recruitment of 
skilled personnel 
Medium Promote positions to research partners and 
collaborators. Advertise in relevant channels 
Active scouting of qualified 
candidates; maintain communication 
with partners and collaborators  
Delays in access or 
limitation to lab facilities 
Low Planning of activities in due time and 
alternative options if facilities cannot be used 
Maintain overview of planned lab 
activities and timeline 
Critical personnel leaving 
/ sick 
Low to 
Medium 
Have regular personnel dialogue to capture 
any possible leave or health situation. Find 
qualified replacement personnel when needed 
Continuous dialogue and good follow 
up with personnel, training of 
personnel with wider skills.  
Limited subsurface data 
access 
Low to 
medium 
Discuss with industry, data providers and NPD 
for sharing data. 
Evaluate data replacement, 
limitations of vintage vs new data 
 
3.3 International cooperation   
The NCS2030 key research collaborators have high international recognition and are strategically positioned. 
In addition, the planned annual ENC conference will be an arena to attract other relevant international 
collaborators to stimulate new ideas, facilitate innovation and explore technology export opportunities. PhDs 
and postdocs will spend parts of their studies at selected collaborators’ locations  to participate in large 
international R&D programs.  Collaborators include: The University of Texas  at Austin (USA) in petroleum 
engineering and CO2 storage research. University of Basilicata (Italy) with support with field analogues and 
detailed sedimentological studies. University of Aberdeen (UK) with expertise in CCUS and digital rock. UFRJ 
and UNICAMP (Brazil) are two universities already in close collaboration with NIORC and CCUS subjects ; 
Imperial College (UK) and Edith Cowan University (Australia) with knowledge in H2 storage; Danish Technical 
University/The Danish Hydrocarbon Research Centre (Denmark) addressing similar challenges in the Danish

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
 
18 
North Sea; University of New South Wales (Australia) in geothermal energy; Stanford University (USA) on 
decision analysis, uncertainty and value of data; Virginia Tech (USA) on ML and DA. RWTH Aachen University 
(Germany) on MF modelling; Memorial University (Canada) has long-lasting collaboration on their offshore 
petroleum industry challenges; and exchanges with the Oil and Gas Technology Centre in UK which supports 
technology for the transition. 
3.4  Researcher training and recruitment (WP7) 
The Sustainable Subsurface Value Chain requires developing a new generation of skilled workforce  (WP7).  
The needed solutions must be developed in collaboration between experienced researchers and the younger 
generation. However, the number of students in petroleum-related topics at universities in Norway has 
dramatically declined and the supply of people with subsurface competence is approaching a critical low 
level. NCS2030 will be an instrument to show tangible solutions for the energy transition and climate change 
mitigation and has plans to educate at least 21 PhD/Postdocs and at least 40 MSc students within all research 
areas. Part of their training will be spent at our international partner location s and UiS will provide support 
via the research strategy program for guiding them in their carre er path. They will also participate in the 
activities at NFIP, interact with academic and industrial partners in meetings and research visits, present their 
research at the annual ENC and Center workshops. UiS also offers study programs in relevant areas such as 
subsurface, energy, risk, decision analysis, economy, etc ., where the Center ’s results will be part of the 
research-based education. Also, UiS is planning to establish the “National Subsurface Academy”, an initiative 
to secure subsurface competence through mapping competence needs, continuous update of study 
programs and the re-education of professionals in the areas of digitalization and energy transition.   
3.5 Gender equality 
NCS2030 has an official goal to have no less than 40% women or men among staff (following the success of 
the NIORC). The proposed CM (incl. WP leaders) fulfills this ambitious goal with 50-50% female-male balance 
(section 3.2). The number of female PhD-students is still much lower than that of male PhD-students within 
petroleum and energy related topics.  The Center aims to educate at least 40% female PhDs/ Postdocs, 
therefore we expect to attract more female candidates a nd promote them to choose subsurface related 
studies. In accordance with UiS policy, females will be particularly encouraged to apply for the positions. 
NCS2030 will encourage e xternal committee and b oard members to include female representatives. 
Likewise, NCS2030 will encourage international partners to preferentially include female researchers.  
3.6 Overall budget outline  
The budget and funding are provided in Table 5a and 5b. The Innovation Program funding is not included 
and will have separate funding by in-kind and cash from the Center partners. 
Table 5a. Overall budget per partner for each WP (KNOK)  
 
Table 5b. Funding per partner for each WP (KNOK)   
 
Work Package UiS NORCE IFE UiB  Halliburton  Schlumberger Total
WP1 18,218                     4,200                       9,800                       -                           1,000                       1,000                                             34,218 
WP2 6,592                       20,975                     11,111                     11,523                     1,500                       1,500                                             53,200 
WP3 8,471                       15,505                     9,800                       11,817                     1,500                       1,500                                             48,594 
WP4 14,112                     11,800                     9,800                       551                           1,000                       1,000                                             38,263 
WP5 20,472                     23,200                     9,800                       1,653                       4,000                       4,000                                             63,125 
WP6 4,985                       4,850                       1,625                       276                           -                           -                                                 11,735 
WP7 6,904                       400                           200                           836                           -                           -                                                   8,340 
WP8 - Mngt 25,533                     5,800                       3,500                       836                           1,000                       1,000                                             37,669 
Sum 105,286                  86,730                     55,636                     27,493                     10,000                     10,000                                         295,144 
Year  NRF Funding   UiS  NORCE  IFE  UiB  6 Companies 
cash 
 2  companies 
in-kind TOTAL
WP1 18,779             3,932               -                   -                   -                   9,506               2,000               34,218             
WP2 16,059             4,001               -                   3,636               3,636               22,869             3,000               53,200             
WP3 12,387             6,464               3,530               -                   3,857               19,356             3,000               48,594             
WP4 9,824               3,759               -                   -                   -                   22,680             2,000               38,263             
WP5 14,465             3,767               -                   -                   -                   36,893             8,000               63,125             
WP6 1,513               3,819               -                   -                   -                   6,404               -                   11,735             
WP7 934                  6,904               -                   -                   -                   502                  -                   8,340               
WP8 - Mngt 6,039               22,640             3,200               2,000               -                   1,790               2,000               37,669             
Sum              80,000              55,286                6,730                5,636                7,493            120,000              20,000 295,144

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
 
19 
Table 5b specification: UiS funding will cover 7 PhD/Postdoc candidates and part of centre management, 
NORCE and IFE will cover 1 PhD each and part of centre management, and UiB will have 2 in-kind PhDs. The 
cash contribution of 6 companies and the in-kind contribution from 2 companies will be distributed evenly 
within each work package. 
 
References 
Aghaeifar, Z., Strand, S., Puntervold, T., Austad, T. and F. M. Sajjad, 2018, Smart Water injection strategies for optimized EOR in a 
high temperature offshore oil reservoir. J. of Petroleum Science and Engineering 165, 743-751.  
Alcorn Z.P., Føyen, T., Zhang, L., Karakas, M., Biswal, L.S., Hirasaki, G., and A. Graue, 2020, CO2 Foam Field Pilot Design and Initial 
Results. Presented at the SPE Improved Oil Recovery Conference, https://doi.org/10.2118/200450-MS 
Alahmed, N., Castro, M.S. and I. Fjelde, 2020. Injection of Dispersed-Oil-in-Water Emulsion to Improve Volumetric Sweep Effiency 
During Water Flooding of Oil Reservoirs. J Porous Media. 23(11):1123-1136. 
Arezki, R., van der Ploeg, F. and F. Toscani, 2019, The shifting natural wealth of nations: The role of market orientation. Journal of 
Development Economics, 138, 228-245. 
Berawala, D. S. and P. Ø. Andersen , 2020, Evaluation of Multicomponent Adsorption Kinetics for Carbon Dioxide Enhanced Gas 
Recovery from Tight Shales. SPE Reservoir Evaluation and Engineering 23, 1060–1076. 
Bjørnseth, F., Kristiansen,T. G., Flatebø, R., Reinertsen, T., Caline, Y. Østensen, R., Tomczak, D., Solhaug, K., Leinenbach, M., and T. 
Jørgensen, 2019, Worlds First Simultaneous Jetting of 72 Laterals with Solids Control - Technology Development and Field Trial, SPE 
Norway One Day Seminar, Bergen, Norway, 14 May 2019  
Birchall, T., Senger, K., Hornum, M., Olaussen, S., and A. Braathen, 2020, Underpressure in the northern Barents shelf: Causes and 
implications for hydrocarbon exploration. AAPG Bulletin, 104 (11), 2267–2295.  
Boait, F. C., White, N. J., Bickle, M. J., Chadwick, R. A., Neufeld, J. A. and H.E. Huppert, 2012, Spatial and temporal evolution of injected 
CO2 at the Sleipner Field, North Sea: Journal of Geophysical Research-Solid Earth, v. 117.  
Bohn, H. and R. T. Deacon, 2000,  Ownership risk, investment, and the use of natural resources. America Economic Review, 90 (3), 
526-549. 
Caglayan, D. G., Weber, N., Heinrichs, H. U., Linßen, J., Robinius, M., Kukla, P. A. and D. Stolten, 2020, Technical potentia l of salt 
caverns for hydrogen storage in Europe, International J. of Hydrogen Energy, 45 (11), 6793-6805,  
Chen, Y. and D.S. Oliver, 2017, Localization and regularization for iterative ensemble smoothers. Computational Geosc., 21(1), 13-30. 
Cui, G., Zhang, L., Ren, B., Enechukwu, C., Liu, Y . and S. Ren, 2016, Geothermal exploitation from depleted high temperatu re gas 
reservoirs via recycling supercritical CO2: Heat mining rate and salt precipitation effects. Applied Energy, 183, 837-852.  
Cust, J. and T. Harding, 2020, Institutions and the location of oil exploration. Journal of the European Economic Association, 18 (3), 
1321-1350. 
Eide, L. I., Batum, M., Dixon, T., Elamin, Z., Graue, A., Hagen, S., Hovorka, S., Nazarian, B., Nøkleby, P. H., Olsen, G. I., Ringrose, P. and 
R.A.M Vieira, 2019, Enabling large- scale carbon capture, utilisation, and storage (CCUS) using offshore carbon dioxide (CO2) 
infrastructure developments — A review. Energies, 12 (10), 1–21. 
Elenius, M., Skurtveit, E., Yarushina, V., Baig, I., Sundal, A. , Wangen, M., Landschulze, K., Kaufmann, R., Choi, J. C., Hellevang, H., 
Podladchikov, Y., Aavatsmark, I., and S. E. Gasda, 2018, Assessment of CO2 storage capacity based on sparse data: Skade Formation: 
International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, v. 79, p. 252-271.  
Evensen, G., 2021 Formulation the history matching problem with consistent error statistics. Computational Geosc. 25, 945-970. 
Farajzadeh, R., Kahrobaei S., Eftekhari, A. A., Mjeni, R. A., Boersma D. and J. Bruining, 2021,  Chemical enhanced oil recovery and the 
dilemma of more and cleaner energy. Nature, Scientific Reports,  11:829 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-80369-z  
Fjelde, I. And Y. Guo, 2019, Carbonated Water Injection - CWIN, An opportunity for offshore CCUS, poster CO2GeoNet Open forum, 
May 6-10, Venice, Italy.  
Fæhn, T., Hagem, C., Lindholt, L., Mland, S. and K. E. Rosendahl, 2017 , Climate policies in a fossil fuel producing country  demand 
versus supply side policies. The Energy Journal, 38 (1). 
Halland, E., Mujezinovic, J., Riis, F., 2014, CO2 Storage Atlas: Norwegian Continental Shelf, Norwegian Petroleum Directorate,  
Harstad, B., 2012,. Buy coal! a case for supply-side environmental policy. Journal of Political Economy, 120 (1), 77-115. 
Heinemann, N., Booth, M.G., Haszeldine, R.S., Wilkinson, M., Scafidi, J., Edlmann, K., 2018), Hydrogen storage in porous geol ogical 
formations- onshore play opportunities in the midland valley (Scotland, UK). International J. of Hydrogen Energy, 43, 20861-20874. 
Hiorth, A., Sagen, J., Lohne, A., Omekeh, A., Nossen, J., Haukås, J. and T. Sira, 2017, Simulation of Sodium Silicate Water D iversion 
Using IORSim. IOR NORWAY 2017 - 19th European Symposium on Improved Oil Recovery: Sustainable IOR in a Low Oil Price World  
Höge, M., Guthke, A. and W. Nowak, 2020, Bayesian Model Weighting: The Many Faces of Model Averaging, Water 12 (309).  
IGA, 2014, Best practices guide for geothermal exploration. Bochum University of Applied Sciences , Bochum, Germany, 196 p.   
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/sustainability-at-
ifc/publications/publications_handbook_geothermal-bp-2ed  
Lake, L., Johns, R., Rossen, B. and G. Pope, 2014, Fundamentals of Oil recovery. Society of Petroleum Engineers, 496 p. 
Luo, X., Lorentzen, R.  J. and T. Bhakta, 2021,  Accounting for model errors of rock physics models in 4D seismic history matching 
problems: A perspective of machine learning. J. of Petroleum Science and Engineering, 196, 107961. 
Quirk, D.G. and S.G. Archer, 2020. Exploration statistics of North Sea pla ys in UK -Norway-Denmark. Geological Society, London, 
Special Publications 494, https://doi.org/10.1144/SP494-2018-185  
Mamonov, A., Kvandal, O. A., Strand , S. and T. Puntervold, 2019, Adsorption of polar organic components onto sandstone rock 
minerals and its effect on wettability and enhanced oil recovery potential by Smart Water, Energy & Fuels 2019 Vol. 33 Pages 5954-
5960 DOI: 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b00101

Societal and Industry-oriented Research Center – do not remove this tag 
20 
Marin, D. Escalona, A. Gr undvåg, S-A., Olaussen, S., Sandvik, S. and K. K. Sliwinska, 2018, Unravelling key controls on the rift climax 
to post-rift fillofmarine rift basins: insights from3Dseismic analysis of the Lower Cretaceous of the Hammerfest Basin, SW Barents 
Sea. Basin Research, 30, 587–612.  
Minde, M. W., Wang, W., Madland, M. V., Zimmermann, U., Korsnes, R. I., Bertolino, S. R., and P. Ø Andersen, 2018, Temperature 
effects on rock engineering properties and rock-fluid chemistry in opal-CT-bearing chalk. J. of Pet. Sci. Engineering, 169, 454-470. 
Minde, M. W. and A. Hiorth, 2020, Compaction and Fluid—Rock Interaction in Chalk Insight from Modelling and Data at Pore-, Core-
and Field-Scale. Geosciences ISSN 2076-3263, DOI: 10.3390/geosciences10010006 
Metidji, M. O. , 2021, Reducing Carbon Intensity While Maximizing Oil Recovery With Polymer -EOR, presented at IOR Norway 
Conference, 26-28 April, 2021, Stavanger, Norway.  
Nezhadali, M., Bhakta, T., Fossum, K. and T. Mannseth, 2021, Multilevel Assimilation of Inverted Seismic Data With Correction  for 
Multilevel Modeling Error. Frontiers in Applied Mathematics and Statistics, https://doi.org/10.3389/fams.2021.673077  
NPD, 2020, Resource report exploration, 2020, https://www.npd.no/en/facts/publications/reports2/resource-report/ 
Peherstorfer, B., Wilcox, K., Gunzburger, M., 2018, Survey of Multifidelity Methods in Uncertainty Propagation, Inference and 
Optimization. SIAM Review 60 (3), https://doi.org/10.1137/16M1082469  
Piñerez Torrijos, I. D., Puntervold, T., Strand, S., Austad, T., Bleivik, T. H. and H. I. Abdullah, 2018, An experimental study of the low 
salinity Smart Water - polymer hybrid EOR effect in sandstone material. J. of Petroleum Science and Engineering 164, 219-229. 
Puntervold, T., Strand, S., Ellouz, R. and T. Austad, 2015, Modified seawater as a smart EOR fluid in chalk. Journal of Petroleum Science 
and Engineering 133, 440-443.
Ohm, S. E., Karlsen, D. A., Phan, N. T., Strand, T., and G. Iversen, G., 2012, Present Jurassic petroleum charge facing Paleo z oic 
biodegraded oil: Geochemical challenges and potential upsides, Embla field, North Sea. AAPG Bulletin, 96, 1523-1552.  
Rasmussen A.B., Sandve T.H, Lauser K.A, Hove, Skaflestad B., Klöfkorn, R., A.F, Rustad, Blatt, M., Sævareid, O., Lie, K.A., and A. Thunef, 
2021, The Open Porous Media Flow reservoir simulator. Computers & Mathematics with Applications, Volume 81 (1), 159-185. 
Ringrose, P., 2020,. How to Store CO2 Underground: Insights from early-mover CCS Projects, Springer International Publishing, 129 p. 
Rognmo, A. U., Al-Khayyat, N., Heldal, S., Vikingstad, I., Eide, Ø., Fredriksen, S. B., Alcorn, Z.P., Graue, A., Bryant, S. L., Kovscek, A. R., 
and M.A. Fernø, 2019 , Performance of Silica Nanoparticles in CO 2 Foam for EOR and CCUS at Tough Reservoir Conditions  SPE J. 
https://doi.org/10.2118/191318-PA  
Rojo, L. A., Koyi, H., Cardozo, N. and A. Escalona, 2020, Salt tectonics in salt-bearing rift basins: progradational loading vs. extension. 
J. of Structural Geology 104193.
R
äss, L., Yarushina, V. M., Simon, N. S. C., and Y. Y. Podladchikov, 2014, Chimneys, channels, pathway flow or water conducting 
features - an explanation from numerical modelling and implications for CO2 storage: Energy Procedia, v. 63, p. 3761-3774.  
Silva, M., and T. Bjørnstad, 2020, Determination of phase-partitioning tracer candidates in production waters from oilfields based on 
solid-phase microextraction followed by gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. J. of Chromatography A, 1629, 461508. 
Sinsbeck, M., Cooke, E., and W. Nowak, 2021, Sequential Design of Computer Experiments for the Computation of Bayesian Model 
Evidence, SIAM/ASA. Journal of  Uncertainty Quantification 9 (1), https://doi.org/10.1137/20M1320432  
Smalley, P. C., Muggeridge, A. H., Amundrud, S. S., Dalland, M., Helvig,O. S., Høgnesen, E. J., Valvatne, P. and A. Østhus, 2020, EOR 
Screening Including Technical, Operational, Environmental and Economic Factors Reveals Practical EOR Potential Offshore on the 
Norwegian Continental Shelf. SPE Improved Oil Recovery Conference, Tulsa, Oklahoma, USA, August 2020   
Stavland, A., Åasen, S., Mebratu A., and F. Gathier, 2020, Scaling of Mechaical Degradaton of EOR polymers: From Field-Scale Chokes 
to Capillary Tubes, SPE202478, peer approved. 
Tillmans, F., Gawthorpe, R.L., Jackson, C.A.L. and A. Rotevatn, 2021, Syn-rift sediment gravity flow deposition on a Late Jurassic fault-
terraced slope, northern North Sea. Basin Research, https://doi.org/10.1111/bre.12538    
Tvedt, A.B.M., Rotevatn, A. and C. A. L. Jackson, 2016, Supra-salt normal fault growth during the rise and fall of a diapir: perspectives 
from 3D seismic reflection data, Norwegian North Sea. J. of Structural Geology 91, 1-26. 
Van Schaack, M. and F. Tillmans, 2021, 4D Aided Exploration- The Blasto Discovery’. NCS Exploration – Recent Advances in Exploration 
Technology, May 19-20, 2021.  
Verdon, J. P., Kendall, J. M., Stork, A. L., Chadwick, R. A., White, D. J., and R. C. Bissell, 2013, Comparison of geomechanical deformation 
induced by megatonne-scale CO2 storage at Sleipner, Weyburn, and In Salah: Proceedings of the National Academy of S ciences of 
the United States of America, v. 110, no. 30, p. E2762-E2771.
Voake, T., Nermoen, A., Ravnås, C., Korsnes, R. I., and I. L. Fabricius, 2019, Influence of temperature cycling and pore fluid on tensile 
s
trength of chalk. J. of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering, 11(2), 277-288. 
Vora, M., Sanni, S., and R. Flage, 2021, An environmental risk assessment framework for enhanced oil recovery solutions from 
offshore oil and gas industry. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 88, 106512, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eiar.2020.106512   
Wangen, M., Gasda, S., and T. Bjornara, 2016, Geomechanical consequences of large -scale fluid storage in the Utsira Formation in 
the North Sea: European Geosciences Union General Assembly 2016, v. 97, p. 486-493.  
Yue, K., Zhang, Y., Chen, Y. , Li, Y., Zhao, L., Rong, C., and Chen, L., A Survey of Decentralizing Applications via Blockchain: The 5G and 
Beyond Perspectiv, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, Accepted, 2021. 
Zhong, X. and A. Escalona, 2020, Evidence of rift segmentation and controls of Middle to Late Jurassic synrift deposition in the 
Ryggsteinen ridge area, northern North Sea, AAPG Bulletin, 104 (7), 1531-1565 
Åsen, S. M., Stavland, A., Strand, D. and A. Hiorth, 2019, An Experimental Investigation of Polymer Mechanical Degradation at  the 
Centimeter and Meter Scale. SPE J., 24(04), 1700-1713.

Side 31 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
A
ppendix 2: Specification of the Project’s funding plan 
Be
low follows a supplementary description of the individual Party’s obligations, and a specified 
orientation of contribution and cost per party. This is based on, and in accordance with information 
in Appendix 1. The cost plan for each Party is based on information of costs provided by the Party.  
Fundi
ng plan for each Party (in NOK 1 000) 
UiS 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Sum % 
NFR Funding 924 2 226 2 263 3 598 3 118 12 130 15 % 
Cash contribution 701 3 150 4 483 4 597 4 718 17 649 22 % 
In-kind 5 792 10 576 10 818 13 883 9 981 51 050 63 % 
Sum 7 418 15 952 17 564 22 078 17 816 80 828 100 % 
NORCE 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Sum % 
NFR Funding 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 4 000 20 000 37 % 
Cash contribution 5 320 5 744 5 871 6 002 6 137 29 074 53 % 
In-kind 400 1 542 1 576 1 612 400 5 530 10 % 
Sum 9 720 11 286 11 447 11 614 10 537 54 603 100 % 
IFE 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Sum % 
NFR Funding 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 12 500 35 % 
Cash contribution 3 575 3 658 3 742 3 830 3 920 18 725 52 % 
In-kind 250 250 1 426 1 462 1 498 4 886 14 % 
Sum 6 325 6 408 7 669 7 792 7 918 36 111 100 % 
UiB 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Sum % 
NFR Funding 150 500 1 300 1 250 1 200 4 400 27 % 
Cash contribution 550 1 250 1 450 1 750 1 750 6 750 42 % 
In-kind 1 176 1 212 2 496 4 883 30 % 
Sum 700 1 750 3 926 4 212 5 446 16 033 100 % 
Landmark Graphics 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Sum % 
NFR Funding 0 % 
Cash contribution 0 % 
In-kind 1 250 1 250 1 250 1 250 1 250 6 250 100 % 
Sum 1 250 1 250 1 250 1 250 1 250 6 250 100 % 
Schlumberger 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Sum % 
NFR Funding 0 % 
Cash contribution 0 % 
In-kind 1 250 1 250 1 250 1 250 1 250 6 250 100 % 
Sum 1 250 1 250 1 250 1 250 1 250 6 250 100 %

Side 32 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
Equinor 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Sum % 
NFR Funding 0 % 
Cash contribution 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 12 500 100 % 
In-kind 0 % 
Sum 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 12 500 100 % 
Vår Energi 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Sum % 
NFR Funding 0 % 
Cash contribution 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 12 500 100 % 
In-kind 0 % 
Sum 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 12 500 100 % 
DNO 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Sum % 
NFR Funding 0 % 
Cash contribution 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 12 500 100 % 
In-kind 0 % 
Sum 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 12 500 100 % 
OKEA 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Sum % 
NFR Funding 0 % 
Cash contribution 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 12 500 100 % 
In-kind 0 % 
Sum 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 12 500 100 % 
Aker BP 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Sum % 
NFR Funding 0 % 
Cash contribution 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 12 500 100 % 
In-kind 0 % 
Sum 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 12 500 100 % 
Wintershall DEA Norge AS 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 Sum % 
NFR Funding 0 % 
Cash contribution 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 12 500 100 % 
In-kind 0 % 
Sum 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 2 500 12 500 100 % 
Fundi
ng and reporting 
It is expected that the Parties keeps within the budget and cost limit. Each Party keeps its own 
Project accounts of Project financing and Project costs. Project financing and Project costs must be 
stated in each Party’s official accounting.  
E
ach Party shall submit a yearly report on activities and progress by 1 November. 
Th
e Project Owner must submit a complete financial report to the Funding Authority for the calendar 
year by 20 January. Therefore, each Party must submit a financial report including total costs for the

Side 33 av 35 
 
«NCS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
previous calendar year to the Project Owner, hereunder in-kind contribution and the costs funded by 
the Funding Authority, by 10 January.  
 
The Project Owner will distribute funding following the Funding Authority’s approval of the annual 
financial report according to received invoices from the Parties to the Project Owner.  
 
The invoice must be marked with: UiSPG NCS2030 Petrosenteret 
 
University of Stavanger - invoice address:  
Org.no: 971 564 679 
Invoice address for EHF-invoices: 971564679 
 
International invoices should be sent by email as a PDF to: faktura@uis.no 
 
Bank information:  
Sparebank 1 SMN, Søndre gate 4, 7011 Trondheim, Norway  
Account no for payment to UiS: 4209 01 01743  
IBAN: NO0442090101743  
Swift: SPTRNO22

Side 34 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
Appendix 3: Background 
A
s to UNIVERSITETET I STAVANGER, it is agreed between the Parties that, to the best of their 
knowledge, no Background is needed by another Party for implementation of the Project or 
utilisation of that other Party’s Results. 
A
s to NORCE, it is agreed between the Parties that, to the best of their knowledge no Background is 
needed by another Party for implementation of the Project or utilisation of that other Party’s Results. 
A
s to INSTITUTT FOR ENERGITEKNIKK, it is agreed between the Parties that, to the best of their 
knowledge no Background is needed by another Party for implementation of the Project or utilisation 
of that other Party’s Results. 
A
s to UNIVERSITETET I BERGEN, UiB is the sole owner of previously developed and granted 
Background Patents governing the use of CO2 for production of methane from Hydrates and for 
Foam EOR with associated CO2 storage. 
A
s to LANDMARK GRAPHICS, Landmark Graphics maintains and retains full ownership of its 
Background and makes no contribution, license, or non-assertion right to a Project or Parties of the 
Collaboration Agreement, unless explicitly agreed for a particular Project in a signed R&D Contract.  
Nothing in this Collaboration Agreement limits Landmark Graphics’ activities alone or with others 
regarding developing technology related to the scopes of the Work Plans.  If Landmark Graphics’ in-
kind contribution is in the form of software solutions, applicable terms for academic/research use 
will apply and be provided at the time of distribution/access.    
A
s to SCHLUMBERGER, it is agreed between the Parties that, to the best of their knowledge: The 
following Background is hereby identified for the Project. Specific limitations and/or conditions shall 
be as mentioned: 
Describe Background Specific limitations and/or 
conditions for implementation 
Specific limitations and/or 
conditions for Commercial 
Utilisation 
DELFI Cloud-based 
solutions, Including the 
Petrotechnical Suite (Petrel, 
Techlog, Eclipse, etc.) 
User rights for the purpose of 
implementation of the Project is 
subjected to IP, licensing, and 
copyrights 
Project Results obtained 
through Schlumberger’s 
solutions are for research 
purposes as per project’s 
description 
A
s to EQUNIOR, it is agreed between the Parties that, to the best of their knowledge, no Background 
is needed by another Party for implementation of the Project or utilisation of that other Party’s 
Results. 
A
s to VÅR ENERGI, it is agreed between the Parties that, to the best of their knowledge, no 
Background is needed by another Party for implementation of the Project or utilisation of that other 
Party’s Results. 
A
s to DNO, it is agreed between the Parties that, to the best of their knowledge, no Background is 
needed by another Party for implementation of the Project or utilisation of that other Party’s Results. 
A
s to OKEA, it is agreed between the Parties that, to the best of their knowledge, no Background is 
needed by another Party for implementation of the Project or utilisation of that other Party’s Results.

Side 35 av 35 
«N CS2030» - Research Council project no. 331644 
As to AKER BP, it is agreed between the Parties that, to the best of their knowledge, no Background 
is needed by another Party for implementation of the Project or utilisation of that other Party’s 
Results. 
A
s to WINTERSHALL DEA NORGE AS, it is agreed between the Parties that, to the best of their 
knowledge, no Background is needed by another Party for implementation of the Project or 
utilisation of that other Party’s Results.
